Religious ecstasy

context . the adjective '' religious '' means that the experience occurs in connection with religious activities or is interpreted in context of a religion . journalist marghanita laski writes in her study '' ecstasy in religious and secular experiences '' , first published in 1961 : '' epithets are very often applied to mystical experiences including ecstasies without , apparently , any clear idea about the distinctions that are being made . thus we find experiences given such names as nature , religious , aesthetic , neo-platonic , ecc . experiences , where in some cases the name seems to derive from a trigger , sometimes from the overbelief . . history . ancient . yoga provides techniques to attain an ecstasy state called samādhi . according to practitioners , there are various stages of ecstasy , the highest being nirvikalpa samadhi . bhakti yoga especially , places emphasis on ecstasy as being one of the fruits of its practice . in buddhism , especially in the pali canon , there are eight states of trance also called absorption . the first four states are rupa or , materially-oriented . the next four are arupa or non-material . these eight states are preliminary trances which lead up to final saturation . in visuddhimagga , great effort and years of sustained meditation are practiced to reach the first absorption , and that not all individuals are able to accomplish it at all . in the dionysian mysteries of ancient greece , initiates used intoxicants , ecstatic dance and music to remove inhibitions and social constraints . modern . modern meditator experiences in the thai forest tradition , as well as other theravadan traditions , demonstrates that this effort and rarity is necessary only to become completely immersed in the absorptions and experience no other sensations . it is possible to experience the absorptions in a less intense state with much less practice . in the monotheism , ecstasy is usually associated with communion and henosis with god . however , such experiences can also be personal mystical experiences with no significance to anyone but the person experiencing them . some charismatic movement practice ecstatic states ( such as '' being slain in the spirit '' ) and interpret these as given by the holy spirit . the firewalkers of greece dance themselves into a state of ecstasy at the annual anastenaria , when they believe themselves under the influence of saint constantine . xygalatas , dimitris , '' firewalking and the brain : the physiology of high-arousal rituals '' , in : joseph bulbulia , richard sosis , erica harris , russell genet , cheryl genet , and karen wyman ( eds . ) evolution of religion : studies , theories , and critiques , santa margarita , calif . : collins foundation press 2007 , pp . & nbsp ; 189–195 xygalatas , dimitris , 2012 . the burning saints . cognition and culture in the fire-walking rituals of the anastenaria london : equinox tomkinson , john l . , anastenaria , anagnosis , athens , 2003 pp & nbsp ; 90–99 historically , large groups of individuals have experienced religious ecstasies during periods of great awakening , to the point of causing controversy as to the origin and nature of these experiences . chauncy , charles . seasonable thoughts on the state of religion in new england . 1743 in response to claims that all emotional expressions of religious ecstasy were attacks on order and theological soundness from the devil , jonathan edwards published his influential treatise on religious affections . here , he argues , religious ecstasy could come from oneself , the devil , or god , and it was only by observing the fruit , or changes in inner thought and behaviour , that one could determine if the religious ecstasy had come from god . in modern pentecostal , charismatic and spirit-filled christianity , numerous examples of religious ecstasy have transpired , similar to historic revivals . these occurrences however , have changed significantly since the time of the toronto blessing phenomena and several other north american so-called revivals and outpourings from the mid 1990s . from that time , religious ecstasy in these movements has been characterized by increasingly unusual behaviors that are understood by adherents to be the anointing of the holy spirit and evidence of god 'doing a new work ' . one of the most controversial and strange examples is that of spiritual birthing - a practice during which women , and at times even men , claim to be having actual contractions of the womb while they moan and retch as though experiencing childbirth . it is said to be a prophetic action bringing spiritual blessings from god into the world . many believe spiritual birthing to be highly demonic in nature and more occult-like than christian . religious ecstasy in these christian movements has also been witnessed in the form of squealing , shrieking , an inability to stand or sit , uttering apocalyptic prophecies , holy laughter , crying and barking . some people have made dramatic claims of sighting 'gold dust ' , 'angel feathers ' , 'holy clouds ' , or the spontaneous appearance of precious gem stones during ecstatic worship events . others have claimed to have received spontaneous gold tooth fillings . the range christian fellowship in the conservative australian city of toowoomba demonstrates such displays of religious ecstasy on an almost weekly basis . in addition to all of the above , worshippers there also use textile banners and during moments of religious ecstasy believe these banners carry special powers of 'anointing ' as a result of divinely inspired artwork . in hagiography ( writings about christian saints ) many instances are recorded in which saints are granted ecstasies . according to the catholic encyclopedia ecstasy religious ecstasy ( called '' supernatural ecstasy '' ) includes two elements : one , interior and invisible , in which the mind rivets its attention on a religious subject , and another , corporeal and visible , in which the activity of the senses is suspended , reducing the effect of external sensations upon the subject and rendering him or her resistant to awakening . the witnesses of a marian apparition often describe experiencing these elements of ecstasy . modern witchcraft traditions may define themselves as '' ecstatic traditions '' , and focus on reaching ecstatic states in their rituals . the reclaiming tradition and the feri tradition are two modern ecstatic witchcraft examples . m . macha nightmare , '' reclaiming tradition witchcraft '' , witchvox , 2001 . retrieved on 2008-01-13 . cholla and gabriel , ecstasy and transgression in the faery tradition , witch eye , 2000 . retrieved on 2008-01-13 . as described by the indian spiritual teacher meher baba , god-intoxicated souls known in sufism as masts experience a unique type of spiritual ecstasy : '' masts are desperately in love with god – or consumed by their love for god . masts do not suffer from what may be called a disease . they are in a state of mental disorder because their minds are overcome by such intense spiritual energies that are far too much for them , forcing them to lose contact with the world , shed normal human habits and customs , and civilized society and live in a state of spiritual splendor but physical squalor . they are overcome by an agonizing love for god and are drowned in their ecstasy . only the divine love embodied in a perfect master can reach them . '' kalchuri , bhau : meher prabhu : lord meher , the biography of the avatar of the age , meher baba , volume six , manifestation , inc . , 1986 , p . 2035 . see also . altered state of consciousness divine madness ( religion ) ecstasy ( philosophy ) ecstasy ( emotion ) enlightenment ( spiritual ) entheogen eroto-comatose lucidity higher consciousness mast ( sufism ) mysticism neurotheology numinous religious experience self-transcendence . notable individuals or movements . montanism , a prophetic christian sect of the 2nd century , founded by montanus and two female colleagues , prisca ( or priscilla ) and maximilla , who attained ecstatic visions through fasting and prayer . alexander scriabin , late 19th century russian composer and pianist who intended his music to induce religious ecstasy anastenaria thomas aquinas experienced an ecstasy during a church service towards the end of his life that caused him to stop writing . dionysus teresa of avila , roman catholic mystic , first entered states of ecstasy while studying religious texts when taken ill in a carmelite cloister . hildegard of bingen , benedictine abbess and mystic caitanya mahaprabhu , founder of gaudiya vaishnavism , immersed into deeper and deeper stages of ecstasy towards krishna during the last 24 & nbsp ; years of his life pio of pietrelcina joseph of cupertino rumi , mystic poet hafez , mystic poet moinuddin chishti , sufi saint amir khusrow , mystic poet marguerite porete , beguine and christian scholar , burned at the stake for her writings simone weil , 20th century french philosopher and christian mystic . references . ja : エクスタシー