Texaco Star Theater

radio . the roots of texaco star theater were in a 1930s radio hit , ed wynn , the fire chief , featuring the manic '' perfect fool '' in a half-hour of vaudevillian routines interspersed with music . wynn 's ratings began to slide and the comedian lapsed amidst personal and professional crises , and the show ended in june 1935 . texaco sponsored the jumbo fire chief program in 1935–36 and the fire chief concert in 1936 . comedian eddie cantor was the star of a show called '' texaco town '' from 1936 to 1938 . the show 's cast featured young singers bobby breen and deanna durbin , announcer jimmy wallington , who read the commercials for fire chief gasoline , harry park , and bandleader jacques renard . the show was a combination of comedy and music . cantor frequently sang a tune about the '' mayor of texaco town '' . texaco star theater ( spelled theatre for most of the radio show 's run ) was first broadcast on october 5 , 1938 , and it continued on the air until june 26 , 1940 . initial host adolphe menjou was succeeded by john barrymore , who was replaced by ken murray . during the almost two-year span , una merkel , irene noblette , charlie ruggles , and ned sparks appeared as comedians . kenny baker , jane froman , and frances langford sang , with david broekman leading the orchestra . jimmy wallington was the announcer . the show began as a variety show with dramatizations and songs by guest stars . in 1940 , the show became a star vehicle for allen , with the show re-titled texaco star theater with fred allen and the program airing on october 2 , 1940 . allen 's previous sponsor , bristol-myers ' ipana toothpaste and sal hepatica laxative , decided to cease their tandem sponsorship of allen 's successful hour , first known as town hall tonight and then , for its final season , the fred allen show . he presided over texaco star theater from 1940 to 1942 as an hour-long show on wednesday and then sunday nights , and from 1942 to 1944 as a half-hour show , until he withdrew from work for over a year on his doctor 's advice . it was during the half-hour version of the show that the more cerebral ( if barbed ) allen premiered the continuing comic sketch for which many remember him best : the ensemble , topical takeoffs of '' allen 's alley '' . guests included some of the best comedic actors of the time , including sam levene , the legendary broadway actor and hollywood film character actor . though some believe the title texaco star theater was retired temporarily , in favor of texaco time , after allen scaled the show back to a half-hour , the show retained the texaco star theater title officially , the confusion likely stemming from the announcers ' first words of introduction : '' it 's texaco time starring fred allen . '' they customarily continued the introduction , as the opening music continued , by referring to texaco star theater . jimmy wallington became the show 's announcer for most of its life with allen as the feature ( he succeeded george burns and gracie allen sidekick harry von zell ) , though for a brief spell during its third season the announcer was budding radio personality and future television legend arthur godfrey . kenny baker also remained for the first two seasons , his previous role with allen 's '' rival '' jack benny serving for a number of situations , although his role was greatly reduced by 1942 , partly because baker had become difficult to manage , particularly after a controversial performance of '' ave maria '' sung in german weeks after the united states officially entered world war ii . allen was forced to leave the show in 1944 due to hypertension ; he returned with a different sponsor on nbc , while staying with and further refining his half-hour format a year later . texaco star theaters next hosts included james melton ( 1944–1947 ) , tony martin ( 1947–1948 ) , gordon macrae ( 1948 ) , jack carter ( 1948 ) , and milton berle ( 1948–1949 ) . television . on television , continuing a practice long established in radio , texaco included its brand name in the show title . when the television version launched on june 8 , 1948 , texaco also made sure its employees were featured prominently throughout the hour , usually appearing as smiling '' guardian angels '' performing good deeds of one or another kind , and a quartet of texaco singers opened each week 's show with the theme song . they did not settle on berle—who hosted a freshly revived radio version in spring 1948—as the permanent host right away ; he hosted the first television texaco star theater in june 1948 but was originally part of a rotation of hosts ( berle himself had only a four-week contract ) . comedian jack carter was host for august . berle was named the permanent host that fall . he was a smash once the new full season began , texaco star theater hitting ratings as high as 80 and owning tuesday night for nbc from 8 to 9 & nbsp ; p.m . et . and , as the show landed a pair of emmy awards in that first year ( the show itself , for best kinescope show ; and , berle as most outstanding kinescoped personality ) , uncle miltie ( he first called himself by that name ad-libbing at the end of a 1949 broadcast ) joked , preened , pratfell , danced , costumed , and clowned his way to stardom , with americans discovering television as a technological marvel and entertainment medium seeming to bring the country to a dead stop every tuesday night , just to see what the madcap berle might pull next . with berle at the helm , texaco star theater was largely credited with driving american television set sales heavily ; the number of tv sets sold during berle 's run on the show was said to have grown from 500,000 , his first year on the tube , to over 30 & nbsp ; million when the show ended in 1956 . texaco star theater was also the highest rated television show of the 1950–1951 television season , the first season in which the nielsen ratings were used . uncle miltie was far from alone in keeping the show alive and kicking . his support players included fatso marco ( 1948–1952 ) , ruth gilbert as '' maxine '' , milton 's love-starved secretary ( 1952–1955 ) , bobby sherwood ( 1952–1953 ) , arnold stang ( 1953–1955 ) , jack collins ( 1953–1955 ) , and milton frome ( 1953–1955 ) . the show 's music was provided by alan roth ( 1948–1955 ) and victor young ( 1955–1956 ) . as phenomenally popular as texaco star theater was , it was hardly an undisturbed appeal . '' berle presented himself as one part buffoon and one part consummate , professional entertainer—a kind of veteran of the borscht belt trenches , '' the museum of broadcast communications would observe decades after the show left the air . '' yet even within his shows ' sanctioned exhibitionism , some of berle 's behavior could cross the line from affability to effrontery . at its worst , the underlying tone of the berle programs can appear to be one of contempt should the audience not respond approvingly . in some cases , this led to a surprising degree of self-consciousness about tv itself—texaco 's original commercial spokesman , sid stone , would sometimes hawk his products until driven from the stage by a cop . but the uneven balance of excess and decorum proved wildly successful . '' based on episodes that appear on the internet archive , it appears the series typically ran 48–50 minutes excluding commercials . title changes . texaco dropped its sponsorship of the show and buick became the new sponsor in 1953 , prompting the show 's name change to the buick-berle show . two years later , it became , simply , the milton berle show , its title until its run ended at last in june 1956 . by then , berle and his audience had probably burned out on each other , and buick had even dropped sponsorship of the show at the beginning of the 1955–1956 season ( opting to sponsor jackie gleason 's half-hour filmed edition of the honeymooners ) , after ratings fell dramatically during the 1954–1955 as well ( the higher ratings of his 1955–56 competition , the phil silvers show on cbs , did not help berle either ) ; though berle would remain one of the nation 's beloved entertainers , overall , the show that made him a superstar was clearly spent for steam and fresh ideas , and two subsequent attempts at television comebacks hosting his own show lasted barely a year each . ( berle did , however , contribute his part to the making of a rock and roll legend : in his final season , he opened his stage to elvis presley amid the beginning of his international popularity . ) part of the problem was variety shows becoming costlier to produce , compared to the texaco days when , among other factors , name guest stars did not mind the low appearance fees they got for appearing , because they could bank the exposure they got from even one appearance on the berle show ; or with fred allen and ed wynn in its earlier radio incarnations . but part of the problem was berle himself : with competition ( jack benny , george burns , bob hope , perry como , etc . ) crowding him more and more as the years went on , as more television performers and creators found their camera legs , and brought new or at least more polished ideas to the air , berle tried refining his camera persona and evolving from the freewheeling , manic style he cultivated so successfully in the texaco years . the net result : the balance between excess and decorum now weighted more toward decorum , which was n't exactly what berle represented at the height of his popularity . he began losing many of his former fans , who preferred when he kept things more unpredictable , and it would be years before his kind of manic balance would find a television home again . broadcast history . note : the most frequent time slot for the series is in bold text . tuesday at 8:00–9:00 & nbsp ; pm on nbc : june 1948 – june 1956 wednesday at 9:00–9:30 & nbsp ; pm on nbc : october 1958 – may 1959 friday at 9:00–10:00 & nbsp ; pm on abc : september 1966 – january 1967 . u.s . television ratings . note : each u.s . network television season starts in late september and ends in late may , which coincides with the completion of may sweeps . in the 1954–1955 season , the half-hour texaco star theater offered in alternation the jimmy durante show and the donald o'connor show on the nbc saturday evening schedule . as a top 30 program , texaco star theater has an average rating of 47.3 . notes . external links . milton berle show radio shows public domain 1949 episode of texaco star theater at the internet archive