Liberal Wars

roots of the conflict . the death of king joão vi in 1826 created a dispute over royal succession . while dom pedro , the emperor of brazil , was the king 's oldest son , his younger brother miguel contended that pedro had forfeited his claim to the throne by declaring brazilian independence . pedro briefly entitled himself dom pedro iv of portugal . neither the portuguese nor the brazilians wanted a unified monarchy ; consequently , pedro abdicated the portuguese throne in favor of his daughter , maria , a child of 7 . in april 1826 , to settle the succession dispute , pedro revised the first constitution of portugal granted in 1822 and left the throne to maria , with his sister isabel maria as regent . a new constitution . in the portuguese constitutional charter , pedro attempted to reconcile absolutists and liberals by allowing both factions a role in the government . unlike the constitution of 1822 , this new document established four branches of government . the legislature was divided into two chambers . the upper chamber , the chamber of peers , was composed of life and hereditary peers and clergy appointed by the king . the lower chamber , the chamber of deputies , was composed of 111 deputies elected to four-year terms by the indirect vote of local assemblies , which in turn were elected by a limited suffrage of male tax-paying property owners . judicial power was exercised by the courts ; executive power by the ministers of the government ; and moderative power by the king , who held an absolute veto over all legislation . discontent . the absolutist party of the landowners and the church , however , were not satisfied with this compromise , and they continued to regard miguel as the legitimate successor to the throne on the grounds that according to the portuguese succession rules ( approved by the cortes after the 1640 restoration ) , pedro had lost the right to the portuguese crown , and therefore to choose a successor , when he took possession of a foreign crown ( brazil ) . they were alarmed by the liberal reforms that had been initiated in spain by the detested revolutionary french ( reforms which the portuguese feudal aristocracy had been spared ) and took heart at the recent restoration of the autocratic ferdinand vii in spain ( 1823 ) who was eradicating all the napoleonic innovations . in february 1828 , miguel returned to portugal , ostensibly to take the oath of allegiance to the charter and assume the regency . he was immediately proclaimed king by his supporters , who pressed him to return to absolutism . a month after his return , miguel dissolved the chamber of deputies and the chamber of peers and , in may , summoned the traditional cortes of the three estates of the realm to proclaim his accession to absolute power . the cortes of 1828 assented to miguel 's wish , proclaiming him king as miguel i of portugal and nullifying the constitutional charter . rebellion . this alleged usurpation did not go unchallenged by the liberals . on may 18 , the garrison in porto , the center of portuguese progressives , declared its loyalty to pedro ( dom pedro iv ) and his daughter maria da glória ( future maria ii of portugal ) , and the constitutional charter . the rebellion against the absolutists spread to other cities . miguel suppressed these rebellions , and many thousands of liberals were either arrested or fled to spain and britain . there followed five years of repression . meanwhile , in brazil , relations between pedro and brazil 's agricultural magnates had become strained . in april 1831 , pedro abdicated in brazil in favor of his son , pedro ii , and sailed for britain . he organized a military expedition there and then went to terceira island in the azores , which was in the hands of the liberals , to set up a government in exile . the government of miguel blockaded the island , but the blockading squadron was attacked by a french squadron during the run-up to the battle of the tagus , where several miguelist ships were captured . in july 1832 , with the backing of liberals in spain and england , an expedition led by dom pedro landed near porto , which the miguelites abandoned and where , after military activities including the battle of ponte ferreira , pedro and his associates were besieged by miguelite forces for nearly a year . to protect british interests , a naval squadron under commander william nugent glascock in hms orestes was stationed in the douro , where it came under fire from both sides . in june 1833 , the liberals , still encircled at porto , sent to the algarve a force commanded by the duke of terceira supported by a naval squadron commanded by charles napier , using the alias 'carlos de ponza ' . the duke of terceira landed at faro and marched north through the alentejo to capture lisbon on july 24 . meanwhile , napier 's squadron encountered the absolutists ' fleet near cape saint vincent ( cabo são vicente ) and decisively defeated it at the fourth battle of cape st . vincent . the liberals were able to occupy lisbon , where pedro moved from porto and repulsed a miguelite siege . a stalemate of nine months ensued . towards the end of 1833 , maria da glória was proclaimed queen , and dom pedro was made regent . his first act was to confiscate the property of all who had served under dom miguel . he also suppressed all religious houses and confiscated their property , an act that suspended friendly relations with rome for nearly eight years , until mid-1841 . the absolutists controlled the rural areas , where they were supported by the aristocracy , and by a peasantry that was galvanized by the church . the liberals occupied portugal 's major cities , lisbon and porto , where they commanded a sizable following among the middle classes . operations against the miguelites began again in earnest in early 1834 . meanwhile , the liberal army had suffered a sound defeat at alcácer do sal , which proved that , despite the duke of terceira 's recent march from faro to lisbon , the south was still loyal to the miguelites . peace . the battle of asseiceira , fought on may 16 , 1834 , was the last and decisive engagement of the portuguese civil war . the migueliste army was still formidable ( about 18,000 men ) , but on may 24 , 1834 , at evoramonte , a peace was declared under a concession by which dom miguel formally renounced all claims to the throne of portugal , was guaranteed an annual pension , and was definitively exiled . dom pedro restored the constitutional charter , but he died september 24 , 1834 . maria da glória resumed her interrupted reign as maria ii of portugal . see also . dissolution of the monasteries in portugal joaquim antónio de aguiar . references . external links .