History of Tristan da Cunha

discovery . the uninhabited islands of tristan da cunha were first sighted in may 1506 during a voyage to india by the portugal admiral tristão da cunha , although rough seas prevented a landing . he named the main island after himself , ilha de tristão da cunha , which was later anglicised to tristan da cunha island . his discovery appeared on nautical maps from 1509 and on mercator 's world map of 1541 . some sources state that the portuguese made the first landing on tristan in 1520 , when the lás rafael captained by ruy vaz pereira called for water . arnaldo faustini . the annals of tristan da cunha , p9 . . 17th century . though far west of the cape of good hope , the islands were on the preferred route from europe to the indian ocean in the 17th century ; ships first crossed the atlantic to brazil on the trade wind , followed the brazil current south to pass the doldrums , and then picked up the westerlies to cross the atlantic again , where they could encounter tristan da cunha . the dutch east india company required their ships to follow this route , and on 17 february 1643 the crew of the heemstede , captained by claes gerritszoon bierenbroodspot , made the first confirmed landing . the heemstede replenished their supplies with fresh water , fish , seals and penguins and left a wooden tablet with the inscription '' today , 17 february 1643 , from the dutch fluyt heemstede , claes gerritsz bierenbroodspot from hoorn and jan coertsen van den broec landed here . '' . thereafter , the dutch east india company returned to the area four more times to explore whether the islands could function as a supply base for their ships . the first stop was in 5 september 1646 on a voyage to batavia , dutch east indies , and the second was an expedition by the galliot nachtglas ( nightglass ) , which left from cape town on 22 november 1655 . the crew of the nachtglas noticed the tablet left by the heemstede on 10 january 1656 near a watering place . they left a wooden tablet themselves as well , like they also did on nachtglas eijland ( now inaccessible island ) . the nachtglas , commanded by jan jacobszoon van amsterdam , examined tristan da cunha and gough island and made rough charts for the dutch east india company . dutch sailors also stayed on the island for four weeks in 1658 , and made their last stop in april 1669 , when their idea of utilizing the islands as a supply base was abandoned , probably due to the absence of a safe harbour . in the 17th century ships were also sent from saint helena by the english east india company to tristan to report on a proposed settlement there , but that project also came to nothing . 18th century . the first survey of the archipelago was made by the france corvette heure du berger in 1767 . soundings were taken and a rough survey of the coastline was made . the presence of water at the large waterfall of big watron and in a lake on the north coast were noted , and the results of the survey were published by a royal navy hydrographer in 1781 . a british naval officer who visited the group in 1760 gave his name to nightingale island . john patten , the master of an english merchant ship , and part of his crew lived on tristan from august 1790 to april 1791 , during which time they captured 3600 seals . the first known attempt to climb queen mary 's peak was in 1793 by the french naturalist louis-marie aubert du petit-thouars , but this was without success . he did collect and catalogue hundreds of plants from this expedition . 19th century . during this time american whaling frequented the neighboring waters , and in december 1810 an american named jonathan lambert '' late of salem , mariner and citizen thereof , '' along with an italian named thomas currie ( anglicized version ) and another named williams , made tristan their home , establishing the first permanent settlement on the island . mackay , margaret ( 1963 ) angry island : the story of tristan da cunha , 1506–1963 . london : arthur barker , p . 30 lambert declared himself sovereign and sole possessor of the group ( which he renamed islands of refreshment ) '' grounding my right and claim on the rational and sure ground of absolute occupancy '' . lambert 's sovereignty was short lived , as he and williams were drowned while out fishing in may 1812 . currie was joined , however , by two other men and they began to cultivate vegetables , wheat and oats , and breed pigs . war of 1812 between the united states and the united kingdom , the islands were largely used as a base by american cruisers sent to prey on british merchant ships . this and other considerations urged by lord charles somerset , then governor of cape colony , led the british government to authorize taking '' possession '' of the islands as dependencies of the cape . the formal proclamation of annexation was made on 14 august 1816 . the british wanted to ensure that the french , their repeated enemies , would not be able to use the islands as a base for a rescue operation to free napoleon from his prison on saint helena . attempts to colonize inaccessible island failed . the islands were occupied by a garrison of british marines , and a civilian population was gradually built up . whalers also set up on the islands as a base for operations in the southern atlantic . in january 1817 the first successful climb was made to the peak of queen mary 's peak . a small garrison was maintained on tristan until november 1817 . at their own request william glass ( d . 1853 ) , a scottish corporal from kelso in the royal artillery , was left behind with his wife , two children and , two masons . thus was begun the present settlement . from time to time additional settlers arrived or shipwrecked mariners decided to remain . in 1827 they persuaded five coloured women ( these were of mixed race : african , asian and european ) from saint helena to migrate to tristan to become the wives of the five desperate bachelors then on the island . later , african women from cape colony married residents in the island . other male settlers were of dutch and italian origin . as a consequence of this history , the inhabitants are of mixed race . dna studies have shown that the founding men were primarily of european ancestry . glass ruled over the little community from 1817 to 1853 in patriarchal fashion . besides raising crops , the settlers possessed numbers of cattle , sheep and pigs . their most lucrative occupation was seal hunting . the island was still frequented by american whalers . in 1856 , 25 people emigrated to the united states , out of a total island population of about 100 . the next year 45 of the inhabitants removed to cape colony . since then other younger or more restless members of the community have emigrated there ; some took to a seafaring life . the inhabitants settled on the plain on the north-west of tristan , as it was the only level land . here a number of substantial stone cottages and a church were built . after the death of glass , the head of the community for some time was a named cotton , who had served on a man of war ship , and for three years had been guard over napoleon at saint helena . cotton was succeeded by peter william green ( anglicised from pieter willemszoon groen ) , a native of katwijk aan zee , who had settled in the island in 1836 . during green 's '' reign , '' the economic condition of tristan suffered by the loss of ship traffic of the whalers . this was largely due to the outbreak of the american civil war diverting resources . in addition , the confederate cruisers css alabama and css shenandoah , captured and burned many union whaling ships . as a result , the number of ships calling at tristan considerably diminished and trade languished . with the opening of the suez canal in 1869 , together with the gradual transition from sailing ships to coal-fired steam ships , the isolation of the islands increased . they were no longer needed as a stopping port for sailing journeys from europe to the far east . most ships went through the canal for a shorter route . in 1867 , alfred of saxe-coburg-gotha and second son of queen victoria , visited the islands . the main settlement , edinburgh of the seven seas , was named in honour of his visit . in october 1873 the islands were carefully surveyed by the challenger . captain george nares recorded that upon the ship 's arrival , the men of tristan came forward offering potatoes , albatross eggs , and other provisions to his crew . . the captain recorded a total of 15 families and 86 individuals living on the island . this expedition also aided two german brothers named stoltenhoff , in moving to the mainland at cape town . they had been living on inaccessible island since november 1871 . they were the only ones to have attempted colonization of any island except the main one . in 1880 the population appears to have attained its maximum . in 1885 the islanders encountered disaster . a poor winter had left them short of food , and a boat sent to barter with a ship offshore was lost with all hands & mdash ; fifteen men . only four adult males were left on the island . at the same time a plague of rats & mdash ; survivors of a shipwrecked vessel & mdash ; wrought much havoc among the crops . the british government planned to remove all the inhabitants to the cape , but the majority preferred to remain . stores and provisions were sent out to them by the british government . the ravages of the rats rendered the growing of wheat impossible ; the wealth of the islanders now consisted of their cattle , sheep , potatoes , and apple and peach trees , and the only form of currency was the potato . the population in 1897 was only 64 ; in 1901 it was 74 , and in 1909 , 95 . tristan da cunha 's residents managed their own affairs without any written laws . the inhabitants have been described as moral , religious , hospitable to strangers , well-mannered and industrious , healthy and long-lived . they lack intoxicating liquors and were said to commit no crimes . , there have been no divorces . they were daring sailors , and in small canvas boats of their own building voyage to nightingale and inaccessible islands . they knit garments from the wool of their sheep , are good carpenters , and make serviceable carts . the society for the propagation of the gospel recruited the first missionary to the island , rev . william f . taylor , who served from 1851 to 1856 . after his departure , the diocese of st helena attempted to establish an anglican mission on the island from 1866 onward , and this post was finally filled by lewis carroll 's youngest brother , the reverend edwin dodgson , who arrived on the island 25 february 1881 . shortly after his arrival he recorded 16 families and 107 individuals living on the island . reverend dodgson returned to england in february 1885 and attempted to arrange for the evacuation of the tristan , meeting with prime minister , lord salisbury , citing dangerous isolation , but the evacuation was deemed impracticable . following a disaster at sea that killed fifteen islanders , a large proportion of the working men , dodgson returned to tristan in 1886 and remained until december 1889 . . 20th century . in 1906 the islanders passed through a period of distress owing to great mortality among the cattle and the almost total failure of the potato crop . the majority again refused , however , to desert the island , though offered allotments of land in cape colony . similar proposals were made and declined several times since the question was first mooted in 1886 . a series of anglican missionaries served the island parish : rev . j . g . barrow and his wife katherine ( 1906–1909 ) , rev . h . m . rogers and his wife rose annie ( 1922–1925 ) , rev . r . a . c . pooley ( 1927–1929 ) , rev . a . g . partridge ( 1929–1932 ) , rev . harold wilde ( 1934–1940 ) . on 12 january 1938 , by letters patent , the islands were declared a dependency of saint helena . prior to this , passing ships stopped irregularly at the island for a period of mere hours . by wireless from r.m.s . empress of australia . '' royal gifts gladden 172 on lonely atlantic island '' ( tristan da cunya ) , '' new york times . 24 march 1935 . during world war ii , the islands were used as a top secret royal navy weather and radio station codenamed hms atlantic isle , to monitor u boats ( which needed to surface to maintain radio contact ) and german shipping movements in the south atlantic ocean . the only currency in use on the island at this time was the potato , and islanders labouring to construct the station were paid in kind with naval supplies for their own use , such as wood , paint and tea . money was introduced the following year , as was the island 's first newspaper , the tristan times . the first administrator , surgeon lieutenant commander e.j.s . woolley , was appointed by the british government during this time . the second duke of edinburgh , the husband of queen elizabeth ii , visited the islands in 1957 as part of a world tour on board the royal yacht britannia . in 1958 as part of an experiment , operation argus , the united states navy detonated an atomic bomb high in the upper atmosphere about southeast of the main island . the 1961 eruption of queen mary 's peak forced the evacuation of the entire population via cape town to wooden huts in the disused pendell army camp in merstham , surrey , england , before moving to a more permanent site at a former royal air force station in calshot near southampton , england , living mainly in a road called tristan close . in 1962 , a royal society expedition went to the islands to assess the damage , and reported that the settlement edinburgh of the seven seas had been only marginally affected . most families returned in 1963 led by willie repetto ( head of the ten-person island council ) and allan crawford ( the former island welfare officer ) . 21st century . on 23 may 2001 , the islands experienced an extratropical cyclone that generated winds up to . a number of structures were severely damaged and a large number of cattle were killed , prompting emergency aid from the british government . in 2005 , the islands were given a united kingdom post code ( tdcu 1zz ) to make it easier for the residents to order goods online . the st helena , ascension and tristan da cunha constitution order 2009 was made by her majesty the queen and the privy council on 8 july and came into operation on 1 september 2009 . the new constitution replaced the 1988 version and among other changes limited the governor 's powers , included a bill of rights , established independence of the judiciary and the public service and formally designated the governor of st helena as , concurrently , the governor for ascension and tristan da cunha . it also ended the '' dependency '' status of ascension and tristan da cunha on st helena . on 4 december 2007 an outbreak of an acute virus-induced flu was reported . this outbreak was compounded by tristan 's lack of suitable and sufficient medical supplies . the british coastguard in falmouth co-ordinated international efforts to get appropriate medicines to tristan to treat the virus . tristan 's elderly population and the very young were most at risk ; however , only four elderly people were hospitalised . royal fleet auxiliary vessel rfa gold rover upon reaching the island with the required medical supplies found no emergency and the islanders in good general health . on 13 february 2008 , fire destroyed the fishing factory and the four generators that supplied power to the island . backup generators were used to power the hospital and give power for part of the day to the rest of the island . power was on during the day and early evening and candlelight was used the rest of the time . on 14 march 2008 , new generators were installed and uninterrupted power was restored . this fire was devastating to the island because fishing is a mainstay of the economy . royal engineers from the british army worked on the harbour to help maintain it , as everything comes and goes by sea . this was supported by a rfa lyme bay ( l3007 ) from the royal fleet auxiliary . the concrete topping put in place has subsequently been badly damaged and on-going repairs will be required to keep the harbour from breaking apart in winter storms . on 16 march 2011 , the maltese-registered freighter ms oliva ran aground on nightingale island , spilling tons of heavy fuel oil into the ocean . the crew were rescued , but the ship broke up , leaving an oil slick that surrounded the island , threatening its population of rockhopper penguins . nightingale island has no fresh water , so the penguins were transported to tristan da cunha for cleaning . bbc news oil-soaked rockhopper penguins in rehabilitation the greek captain and his 21 filipino crew stayed in edinburgh of the seven seas and assisted the islanders in their work . saint helena independent 25 march 2011 p . 3 in november 2011 the volvo ocean race boat puma 's mar mostro headed to the island after the mast came down to meet a supporting vessel in the first leg between alicante ( spain ) and cape town ( south africa ) . this event put the archipelago in the world press that were reporting the race , making it known to a larger public . references .