1974 in literature

events . february – novelist juan carlos onetti is one of a group arrested by the uruguayan dictatorship for selecting as a competition prizewinner and publishing in the newspaper marcha a short story implicitly critical of the military regime . he subsequently goes into exile in spain . february 12 – after publication at the end of 1973 of aleksandr solzhenitsyn 's the gulag archipelago ( архипелаг гулаг ) , the author is arrested for treason ; the following day he is deported from the soviet union . in spring and summer the first translations into french and english begin to appear . august 8 – the first of armistead maupin 's tales of the city is published as a serial in the pacific sun ( marin county , california ) . october 21 – new guildhall library opens in the city of london . unknown dates the jack kerouac school of disembodied poetics is founded by allen ginsberg and anne waldman . german writer uwe johnson moves to sheerness on the english isle of sheppey . . new books . fiction . kingsley amis – ending up rené barjavel – les dames à la licorne augusto roa bastos – i , the supreme ( yo el supremo ) peter benchley – jaws hal bennett – wait until the evening heinrich böll – the lost honour of katharina blum ( die verlorene ehre der katharina blum oder : wie gewalt entstehen und wohin sie führen kann ) anthony burgess – the clockwork testament , or enderby 's end andrés caicedo – '' maternidad '' robert a . caro – the power broker agatha christie – poirot 's early cases roald dahl – switch bitch philip k . dick – flow my tears , the policeman said annie dillard – pilgrim at tinker creek lawrence durrell – monsieur frederick forsyth – the dogs of war john fowles – the ebony tower donald goines – crime partners imil habibi – the secret life of saeed : the pessoptimist ( الوقائع الغريبة في اختفاء سعيد أبي النحس المتشائل , al-waqāʾiʿ al-gharībah fī 'khtifāʾ saʿīd abī ' l-naḥsh al-mutashāʾil ) john hawkes – death sleep joseph heller – something happened james herbert – the rats hammond innes – north star erica jong – fear of flying anna kavan – let me alone stephen king – carrie manuel mujica láinez el laberinto el viaje de los siete demonios derek lambert blackstone and the scourge of europe the yermakov transfer margaret laurence – the diviners john le carré – tinker , tailor , soldier , spy ursula k . le guin – the dispossessed madeleine l'engle – a wind in the door h . p . lovecraft and august derleth – the watchers out of time and others robert ludlum – the cry of the halidon brian lumley – beneath the moors colleen mccullough – tim nicholas meyer – the seven-per-cent solution james a . michener – centennial elsa morante – la storia ( history . a novel , 1978 ) gerald murnane – tamarisk row meja mwangi – carcase for hounds vladimir nabokov – look at the harlequins ! edith pargeter – sunrise in the west ( first in the brothers of gwynedd quartet ) robert b . parker – god save the child ellen raskin – figgs & phantoms ishmael reed – the last days of louisiana red harold robbins – the pirate fran ross – oreo leonardo sciascia – todo modo tom sharpe – porterhouse blue sidney sheldon – the other side of midnight c . p . snow – in their wisdom studs terkel – working . children and young people . richard adams – shardik stan and jan berenstain – the berenstain bears ' new baby robert cormier – the chocolate war paula danziger – the cat ate my gymsuit fynn ( sydney hopkins ) – mister god , this is anna virginia hamilton – m . c . higgins , the great diana wynne jones – the ogre downstairs ruth manning-sanders – a book of sorcerers and spells jill murphy – the worst witch bill peet – merle the high flying squirrel miriam roth – a tale of five balloons ( מעשה בחמישה בלונים ) richard scarry – the best rainy day book ever jill paton walsh – the emperor 's winding sheet mary e . wilkins-freeman – collected ghost stories . drama . nezihe araz – bozkır güzellemesi ( an ode to the steppe ) michael cook – jacob 's wake dario fo – ca n't pay ? wo n't pay ! ( non si paga ! non si paga ! ) paavo haavikko ratsumies ( the horseman ) kuningas lähtee ranskaan ( the king goes forth to france ) harald pitkäikäinen ira levin – veronica 's room mustapha matura – play mas harold pinter – no man 's land david rudkin – penda 's fen ( television play ) tom stoppard – travesties . poetry . duncan bush , tony curtis , nigel jenkins – three young anglo-welsh poets . non-fiction . maya angelou – gather together in my name carl bernstein and bob woodward – all the president 's men vincent bugliosi with curt gentry – helter skelter david clark – social therapy in psychiatry shelby foote – the civil war : a narrative – vol 3 : red river to appomattox dumas malone – jefferson and his time robert m . pirsig – zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance erin pizzey – scream quietly or the neighbours will hear jonathan raban – soft city piers paul read – alive : the story of the andes survivors soviet armenian encyclopedia ( հայկական սովետական հանրագիտարան , haykakan sovetakan hanragitaran ; begins publication ) lewis thomas – the lives of a cell : notes of a biology watcher joseph wambaugh – the onion field . births . january 6 – romain sardou , french novelist january 26 – shannon hale , american fantasy author february 15 – miranda july ( née grossinger ) , american filmmaker , performance artist and fiction writer april 13 – k . sello duiker , south african novelist ( died 2005 ) june 12 – chika unigwe , nigerian novelist writing in english and dutch august 7 – faisal tehrani , malaysian novelist august 9 – ryūsui seiryōin ( 清涼院 流水 ) , japanese novelist august 18 – nicole krauss , american novelist august 23 – serhiy zhadan , ukrainian poet , novelist and essayist september 20 – owen sheers , fijian-born welsh poet , playwright and novelist november 4 – carlos be , spanish playwright december 26 – joshua john miller , american novelist and screenwriter unknown dates naomi alderman , english novelist sarah hall , english novelist joanna kavenna , english novelist and travel writer joe meno , american novelist and journalist roger williams , welsh dramatist and screenwriter . deaths . january 20 – edmund blunden , english poet and critic ( born 1896 ) january 25 – james pope-hennessy , english biographer ( murdered , born 1916 ) january 29 h . e . bates , english novelist ( born 1905 ) sheila stuart , scottish author and children 's writer ( born 1892 ) february 2 – marieluise fleißer , german dramatist ( born 1901 ) february 24 – martin armstrong , english poet and short story writer ( born 1882 ) march 3 – carl jacob burckhardt , swiss historian ( born 1891 ) march 8 – buddhadeb bosu , bengali poet and writer ( born 1908 ) march 19 – austin clarke , irish poet , playwright and novelist ( born 1896 ) march 24 – olive higgins prouty , american novelist ( born 1882 ) april 14 – howard pease , american novelist ( born 1894 ) may 9 – l . t . c . rolt , english biographer and writer of ghost stories ( born 1910 ) may 13 – arthur j . burks , american writer ( born 1898 ) june 2 – tom kristensen , danish novelist and poet ( born 1893 ) june 11 – julius evola , italian esotericist , journalist and philosopher ( born 1898 ) june 9 – miguel ángel asturias , guatemalan nobel prize-winning novelist ( born 1899 ) july 3 – samuel roth , american publisher ( born 1893 ) july 4 – georgette heyer , english novelist ( born 1902 ) august 7 – rosario castellanos , mexican writer and diplomat ( electric shock , born 1925 ) august 11 – jan tschichold , german-born typographer and writer ( born 1902 ) september 21 – jacqueline susann , american novelist ( born 1918 ) october 4 – anne sexton , american poet ( born 1928 ) october 28 – david jones , anglo-welsh poet and artist ( born 1895 ) october 29 – victor e . van vriesland , dutch writer ( born 1892 ) november 5 – william gardner smith , expatriate american novelist and journalist ( born 1927 ) november 7 – eric linklater , welsh-born scottish novelist and travel writer ( born 1899 ) november 26 – cyril connolly , english critic and writer ( born 1903 ) november 28 – david jones , english artist and poet ( born 1895 ) december 14 – walter lippmann , american writer ( born 1889 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : eyvind johnson and harry martinson . canada . see 1974 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : pascal lainé , la dentellière prix médicis french : porporino ou les mystèrs de naples prix médicis international : julio cortázar , libro de manuel . united kingdom . booker prize : nadine gordimer , the conservationist and stanley middleton , holiday . carnegie medal for children 's literature : mollie hunter , the stronghold cholmondeley award : d.j . enright , vernon scannell , alasdair maclean eric gregory award : duncan forbes , roger garfitt , robin hamilton , frank ormsby , penelope shuttle newdigate prize : alan hollinghurst james tait black memorial prize for fiction : lawrence durrell , monsieur ( novel ) james tait black memorial prize for biography : john wain , samuel johnson queen 's gold medal for poetry : ted hughes . united states . frost medal : john hall wheelock hugo award : arthur c . clarke , rendezvous with rama nebula award : ursula k . le guin , the dispossessed newbery medal for children 's literature : paula fox , the slave dancer pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : robert lowell , the dolphin . elsewhere . miles franklin award : ronald mckie , the mango tree premio nadal : luis gasulla , culminación de montoya viareggio prize : clotilde marghieri , amati enigmi . references .