Marble sculpture

material origin and qualities . marble is a metamorphic rock derived from limestone , composed mostly of calcite ( a crystalline form of calcium carbonate , caco 3 ) . the original source of the parent limestone is the seabed deposition of calcium carbonate in the form of microscopic animal skeletons or similar materials . marble is formed when the limestone is transformed by heat and pressure after being overlain by other materials . the finest marbles for sculpture have no or few stains , though natural stains can be incorporated into the work itself . advantages . among the commonly available stones , only marble has a slight translucency i.e . subsurface scattering that is comparable to that of human skin . it is this translucency that gives a marble sculpture a visual depth beyond its surface and this evokes a certain realism when used for figurative works . marble also has the advantage that , when first quarried , it is relatively soft and easy to work , refine , and polish . as the finished marble ages , it becomes harder and more durable . preference to the cheaper and less translucent limestone is based largely on the fineness of marble 's grain , which enables the sculptor to render minute detail in a manner not always possible with limestone . in contrast to limestone , marble is also extremely weather-resistant . as a result , surface changes due to the immediate environment are not always visible to the naked eye . this feature can pose challenges when dating ancient works . . disadvantages . marble does not bear handling well as it will absorb skin oils when touched , which leads to yellow brownish staining . while more resistant than limestone it is subject to attack by weak acids , and so performs poorly in outdoor environments subject to acid rain . for severe environments , granite is a more lasting material but one which is far more difficult to work and much less suitable for refined works . compared to metals such as bronze , furthermore , marble is inflexible and vulnerable to fracturing . this drawback means that sculptors must incorporate specific supporting features into the sculpture to prevent collapse . in thomas ridgeway gould 's the west wind , for example , he poised the figure 's short and slender ankles delicately upon the balls of her small feet . this would not be possible without the deliberate decision by gould to distribute almost all of the marble 's weight to her massive , flowing skirt . unlike bronze sculpture , this statue is not hollow ; her drapery is one solid block of marble . for a description of the greater flexibility of bronze sculptures and the ease with which action and extension may be expressed through bronze , see bronze sculpture . note especially the sculpture jeté . . developing a sculpture . sculptors usually begin by knocking off , or '' pitching , '' large portions of unwanted stone . a suitable tool for this task is a point chisel , which is a long , hefty piece of steel with a point at one end and a broad striking surface at the other . a pitching tool may also be used at this early stage , which is a wedge-shaped chisel with a broad , flat edge . the pitching tool is useful for splitting the stone and removing large , unwanted chunks . the sculptor may also use a mallet , which is similar to a hammer with a broad , barrel-shaped head . when the mallet connects to the tool , energy is transferred through the tool , shattering the stone . most sculptors work rhythmically , turning the tool with each blow so that the stone is removed quickly and evenly . this is the '' roughing out '' stage of the sculpting process . while a mallet provides the force needed to fracture the marble , it must be used accurately . the smallest miscalculation can ruin the intended sculpture and even injure the sculptor . some artists prefer to carve directly onto the stone , without a model ; the renaissance artist michelangelo , for example , claimed that his job was to free the human form trapped inside the block . other artists sculpt a preliminary model out of clay or wax and then translate its features to stone through the use of calipers or a pointing machine . once the general shape of the statue has been determined , the sculptor uses other tools to refine the figure . a toothed chisel or claw chisel has multiple gouging surfaces which create parallel lines in the stone . these tools are generally used to add texture to the figure . an artist might mark out specific lines by using calipers to measure an area of stone to be addressed and marking the removal area with pencil , charcoal or chalk . the stone carver generally uses a shallower stroke at this point in the process . eventually , the sculptor has changed the stone from a rough block into the general shape of the finished statue . tools called rasps and rifflers are then used to enhance the shape into its final form . a rasp is a flat , steel tool with a coarse surface . the sculptor uses broad , sweeping strokes to remove excess stone as small chips or dust . a riffler is a smaller variation of the rasp , which can be used to create details such as folds of clothing or locks of hair . polishing is the last step of the carving process . sculptors use a variety of fine , abrasive materials such as sandpaper or emery paper to highlight patterns in the stone and to accentuate its natural sheen . marble sculpture ( c.600 bce - present ) , encyclopedia of sculpture some sculptors may also use tin oxide to achieve a high-lustre polish . regardless of the method , however , a glossy marble sculpture will appear more translucent than one that has not been polished . . tools . the italian terms for the basic carving tools of stone sculpture are given here , and where possible the english terms have been included . la mazza – the mallet . this is used to strike the chisel . gli scalpelli – the chisels . these come in various types : la subbia – ( the point ) a pointed chisel or punch l'unghietto – ( round or rondel chisel ) literally , '' little fingernail '' la gradina – ( toothed chisel or claw ) a chisel with multiple teeth- lo scalpello – a flat chisel lo scapezzatore – ( pitcher or pitching tool ) a hefty chisel with a broad blunt edge , for splitting . il martello pneumatico – jackhammer il flessibile – an angle grinder , fitted with an electrolysis-applied diamond studded blade hand drill in addition to those hand tools listed above , the marble sculptor uses a variety of hammers – both for the striking of edge tools ( chisels and hand drills ) and for striking the stone directly ( bocciarda a martello in italian , boucharde in french , bush hammer in english ) . following the work of the hammer and chisel , the sculptor will sometimes refine the form further through the use of rasps , files and abrasive rubbing stones and/or sandpaper to smooth the surface contours of the form . tool technique . image : statue of winged nike ( paris 2002 ) . jpg thumb upright winged victory of samothrace , hellenistic marble sculpture of the 3rd century bc hammer and point work is the technique used in working stone , in use at least since roman times , as it is described in the legend of pygmalion , and even earlier , the ancient greek sculptors used it from c . 650 bc . it consists of holding the pointed chisel against the stone and swinging the hammer at it as hard as possible . when the hammer connects with the striking end of the chisel , its energy is transferred down the length and concentrates on a single point on the surface of the block , breaking the stone . this is continued in a line following the desired contour . it may sound simple but many months are required to attain competency . a good stone worker can maintain a rhythm of relatively longer blows ( about one per second ) , swinging the hammer in a wider arc , lifting the chisel between blows to flick out any chips that remain in the way , and repositioning it for the next blow . this way , one can drive the point deeper into the stone and remove more material at a time . some stoneworkers also spin the subbia in their fingers between hammer blows , thus applying with each blow a different part of the point to the stone . this helps prevent the point from breaking . image : reclininghermaphrodite.jpg thumb right the 1st-century bc sculpture 'the reclining hermaphroditus ' , in the museo nazionale romano , palazzo massimo alle terme in rome . a few well-known marble sculptures . parthenon marbles , in the acropolis museum , athens venus de milo , ( venus de milo ) in the louvre , paris david by michelangelo , in florence laocoön and his sons by agesander , in the vatican museums , vatican city moses by michelangelo , in rome pietà by michelangelo , in the vatican discobolus lancellotti , the lancellotti discus thrower in the museo nazionale romano , rome . see also . list of sculptors stone sculpture marble carrara marble sculpture topic outline of sculpture . references . external links . marble sculpture at the british museum marble sculpture from india we craft sculptures on marble the art of making in antiquity : stoneworking in the roman world king 's college , london