Langley Park School for Boys

location . it is situated near eden park and the bethlem royal hospital on hawksbrook lane close to the boundary of the london borough of bromley with the london borough of croydon . construction for the new school building was completed in december 2011 , and the staff and pupils moved into the building in january 2012 , following which the old buildings were demolished . admissions . at 11+ , admission to the school is according to the london borough of bromley education admissions procedures . at 16+ , the school has changed its admissions policy and it is now also dependent on the proximity of the pupil 's home to the school . at 16+ , the school is co-educational . sport . langley park school for boys is one of the few state schools that play rugby and hockey , and is one of the top three hockey schools in the country , having competed in the last four national finals . in 2004 , under the leadership of jack sampson , the under-16 team were crowned national champions , the first comprehensive school to achieve this . in 2013 the under-18 team was nearly crowned national champions with an unbeaten record in the tournament ; however , they narrowly missed out to the eventual winners whitgift school on goal difference . lpsb offers a wide range of sports , including rugby and hockey , from year 7 . the new buildings for the school provide private hockey facilities for the school , which are currently being shared with langley park school for girls . other sports include cricket , tennis and basketball . music . langley park school for boys ' music department offers groups from the traditional concert band , chamber orchestra , brass band and choir , to world music styles , including a cuban band and an african drumming group . in 2013 , the brass band was one of the finalists of the national music for youth competition who were selected to perform at royal albert hall . the band played in the primary proms show , and performed take that 's '' shine '' , the theme from the magnificent seven and concierto de aranjuez . history . the school was originally the beckenham technical institute , opening in 1901 and situated in what is now venue 28 , beckenham . the school went through a variety of name changes in its early days : the technical day school , beckenham ; beckenham secondary school ; beckenham county school for boys ; beckenham and penge county school for boys ; in 1944 it was the beckenham and penge county grammar school under headmaster l.w . white , ma ( cantab ) . in 1950 the school was mentioned in nature ( journal ) the scientific journal . nature ( 1950 ) 166 : 768 . doi:10.1038/166768b0 the article in nature explained that a periodical named '' beckenham and penge grammar school : scientific society proceedings '' existed in which scientific work done by the boys was reported . by 1954 it was called beckenham and penge grammar school for boys . an increase in size meant the school moved to new buildings in high st , penge , in 1931 . it moved from penge to its present location in eden park , beckenham , in january 1969 , at which point it adopted its current name . in the late 1980s , schools could opt out of local government control by becoming a grant-maintained school which were funded by a direct grant of money from the central government . this new arrangement enabled schools to have greater control of their finances than they would have had under local government control . hansard indicates that a ballot of parents occurred on 8 march 1991 regarding the question of the school becoming a '' grant maintained school '' . the school was given a grant of £60,000 as a transitional grant . the school outgrew its present accommodation and a completely new building was constructed adjacent to the location of the former school , which was occupied from january 2012 . the school motto , mores et studia , means '' good character and learning '' . headteachers . the school started in 1901 , as the beckenham technical institute at a site close to beckenham 's public baths the headmaster was mr c.t.f . watts , in 1931 he was replaced by mr s . gammon who had been at the windsor county school . in october 1940 mr gammon was killed by a bomb dropped during the war . he was replaced by mr l.w . white who was appointed in september 1941 . in december 1962 , mr white retired and was replaced with mr d.a . raeburn . langley park boys school yearbook 1990 five terms after the school relocated to its current site , off south eden park road , headmaster david a . raeburn retired , and was replaced by b.a . phythian ( a master from manchester grammar school and successful academic author ) , who led the school as it converted to comprehensive status . brian phythian had written and edited some books on the subject of the english language which include a concise dictionary of correct english , rowman & littlefield publishers , 1979 , a concise dictionary of english slang , b.a . phythian , hodder & stoughton , london , 1976 english grammar , b.a . phythian , teach yourself , sevenoaks , 1980 correct english , b.a . phythian , hodder and stoughton , london , 1985 , a concise dictionary of foreign expressions , b.a . phythian , hodder and stoughton , london , 1982 , good english , b.a . phythian , teach yourself , sevenoaks , 1985 a concise dictionary of english idioms , b.a . phythian , hodder & stoughton , london , 1993 considering poetry : an approach to criticism , w . barton and others , edited by b.a . phythian , english universities press , london , 1970 and the manchester grammar school . the manchester grammar school , 1515–1965 , edited by j.a graham and brian arthur phythian , manchester university press , manchester , 1965 in december 1989 , brian phythian was succeeded by r.v.p . sheffield , who was in the post until 1999 , leaving the school under allegations of financial irregularities . suspended head will face hearing , 1 january 2000 , news shopper the deputy headteacher , k mcgregor , took over as acting headteacher until the appointment of r northcott in 2001 , who retired in july 2013 . it is stated in the 1990 year book that mr sheffield had a degree in psychology from the university of nottingham and a med from birmingham university . the yearbook also states that mr sheffield was working in a school in waddington before being senior master at a school in worcester in 1978 , in 1984 he became deputy head at newent school . mr sheffield was mentioned in a news paper article about a £50,000 out of court settlement relating to the occupational asthma suffered by david parker a former craft design and technology teacher at the school . the current headteacher is steve parsons , who started in september 2013 . notable former pupils . bradley pritchard , former charlton athletic footballer rory allen , former tottenham hotspur and portsmouth footballer harold sydney bride , wireless operator on the rms titanic norman hunter , writer , creator of professor branestawm robert key , former england cricketer and kent county cricket club captain henry mee , artist john tyndall , neo-nazi political activist david case , air commodore , highest ranking black officer in the british forces jack mcmanus , singer/songwriter tom misch , singer , songwriter , producer matt hankin , english rugby union player nick land , english philosopher . beckenham and penge county grammar school . hugh bean cbe , professor of violin at the royal college of music 1954–2003 carey blyton , composer of bananas in pyjamas air vice-marshal ronald dick cb , station commander of raf honington 1978–80 , and head of british defence staff – us 1984–88 michael finnissy , composer and professor of composition since 1999 at the university of southampton patrick ground , conservative mp for feltham and heston 1983–92 john clifford strong cbe , governor of the turks and caicos islands 1978–82 derek underwood , kent and england bowler ( known as '' deadly '' by the australians ) bill wyman , musician , ex-member of the rolling stones keith lewin , professor of international education and director of the centre for international education at the university of sussex , author of 18 books on education and development , consultant to un agencies , and honorary professor of beijing normal and zhejiang universities in china .