Le Monde diplomatique

history . 1954–1989 . le monde diplomatique was founded in 1954 by hubert beuve-méry , founder and director of le monde , the french newspaper of record . subtitled the '' organ of diplomatic circles and of large international organisations , « organe des cercles diplomatiques et des grandes organisations internationales » '' 5,000 copies were distributed , comprising eight pages , dedicated to foreign policy and geopolitics . its first editor in chief , françois honti , developed the newspaper as a scholarly reference journal . honti attentively followed the birth of the non-aligned movement , created out of the 1955 bandung conference , and the issues of the '' third world '' . claude julien became the newspaper 's second editor in january 1973 . at that time , the circulation of le monde diplomatique had jumped from 5,000 to 50,000 copies , and would reach , with micheline paulet , 120,000 in under 20 years . numbers given in '' le monde diplomatique depuis 1954 . '' , les amis du monde diplomatique , 1901 law association , 26 september 2006 without renouncing its '' third-worldism '' position , it extended the treatment of its subjects , concentrating on international economic and monetary problems , strategic relations , the middle-east conflict , etc . le monde diplomatique took an independent stance , criticising both the neoliberal ideology of the left and conservative policies represented by uk prime minister margaret thatcher and us president ronald reagan in the 1980s . 1989–present . after the november 1989 fall of the berlin wall following the dissolution of the soviet union , and the 1990-1991 gulf war , the newspaper began to criticise what it described as an '' american crusade '' . ignacio ramonet was elected director or editor-in-chief in january 1991 , serving until 2008 . under his leadership , le monde diplomatique analysed the post-cold war world , paying specific attention to '' ethnic '' conflicts that arose in this period : the yugoslav wars , the 1994 rwandan genocide , the conflicts in the caucasus , etc . , as well as to the new information technology . ramonet has also published books about the media and their relationship to national societies . as noted by françois cusset , french universities have not developed an interdisciplinary approach to media studies . he notes that leftist journals including le monde diplomatique have had an editorial approach that is committed to '' critique of dominant media '' , both in terms of their roles in setting agendas and in enjoying status perks . françois cusset , '' media studies : a french blind spot '' , inmedia , 1/2012 ; accessed 01 october 2018 both ramonet and his successor , serge halimi , published books that critiqued the media from outside academic circles . serge halimi and christine larrazet , '' at the crossroads of media , media critique , and the critique of media critics – an interview with serge halimi , editor-in-chief of 'le monde diplomatique ' '' , inmedia , 2/2012 ( interview 25 july 2012 ) ; accessed 01 october 2018 the newspaper established financial and editorial independence from le monde in 1996 , forming its own company . le monde owns 51 % ; the friends of le monde diplomatique and gunter holzmann association , comprising the paper ’ s staff , together own 49 % . in an editorial in january 1995 , ignacio ramonet coined the term '' pensée unique '' ( '' single thought '' ) to describe the supremacy of the neoliberal ideology . ignacio ramonet , '' editorial : la pensée unique '' , le monde diplomatique , janvier 1995 the newspaper supported the november–december 1995 general strike in france against prime minister alain juppé 's ( rpr ) plan to cut pensions . three years later , after a proposal in a 1997 editorial by ramonet , le monde diplomatique took a founding role in the creation of attac , an alter-globalisation ngo . it was founded to advocate the tobin tax , and chapters have been started throughout the world . it now supports a variety of left-wing causes . the newspaper also took an important role in the organisation of the 2001 porto alegre world social forum . after the iraq war , started in 2003 under the george w . bush administration , le monde diplomatique continued to criticise the us policy of '' violent intervention '' in the middle east and the neoconservative project to '' reshape '' the so-called '' greater middle east '' region . ramonet devoted considerable space to reporting on hugo chávez , with whom he was said to have developed a close relationship , and his bolivarian revolution . ramonet was succeeded by serge halimi who had a phd in political science from the university of california berkeley . in 2018 , lmd publishes a total of 37 print and online editions , in a total of 20 languages . '' about lmd '' , le monde diplomatique , october 2018 the august 2017 issue of the monthly was not marketed in algeria . according to sources close to the distributor , the newspaper did not get permission to do so . algerian authorities gave no explanation . the heads of the newspaper claim that it was '' banned '' from sale in the country because of a report by journalist pierre daum . he is best known for writing a book about the harkis who stayed in algeria after algerian war , and about the difficult social and economic situation of some young algerians . . le monde diplomatique sa . andré fontaine , the director of le monde , signed a 1989 convention with claude julien which guaranteed the monthly 's autonomy . but it gained complete statutory , economic and financial independence in 1996 with the creation of le monde diplomatique sa . with a donation from günter holzmann , a german antifascist exiled before world war ii to bolivia , the monthly 's employees acquired approximately one-quarter of the capital , while les amis du monde diplomatique , a 1901 law association of readers , bought another quarter . thus , since the end of 2000 , the newspaper 's employees and readers retain 49 % of le monde diplomatique sas capital , largely above the control stock minorité de blocage necessary to control the direction and editorial line of the monde diplo . the remaining 51 % is owned by le monde . . controversies . criticism . jean-marie colombani , former editor of the daily le monde , was attributed by le monde diplomatiques former director general bernard cassen as saying : '' le monde diplomatique is a journal of opinion ; le monde is a journal of opinions . '' : interview with le monde diplomatiques former director general bernard cassen . . 9/11 conspiracy theories . the norwegian version of the july 2006 le monde diplomatique sparked interest when the editors ran , on their own initiative , a three page main story on the september 11 , 2001 attacks and summarised the various types of 9/11 conspiracy theories ( which were not specifically endorsed by the newspaper , only reviewed ) . 11.september - an innsidde jobb ? , norwegian edition of le monde diplomatique , july 2006 . see also english translation : kim bredesen , was 9/11 an inside job ? and other links the voltaire network , which has somehow changed position since the 11 september attacks and whose director , thierry meyssan , became a leading proponent of 9/11 conspiracy theory , explained that although the norwegian version of le monde diplomatique had allowed it to translate and publish this article on its website , the mother-house , in france , categorically refused it this right , thus displaying an open debate between various national editions . pour le monde diplomatique norvégien , le 11 septembre est un complot intérieur us , voltaire network el 11 de septiembre fue un complot interno estadounidense , estima la prensa noruega in december 2006 , the french version published an article by alexander cockburn , co-editor of counterpunch , which strongly criticised the endorsement of conspiracy theories by the us left-wing , alleging that it was a sign of '' theoretical emptiness . '' distractions from awful reality - us : the conspiracy that wasn ’ t , by alexander cockburn in le monde diplomatique , december 2006 scepticisme ou occultisme ? le complot du 11-septembre n ’ aura pas lieu , by alexander cockburn in le monde diplomatique , december 2006 iranian translation poderes imaginários - a '' conspiração '' das torres gêmeas the norwegian le monde diplomatique , did again however mark its difference from the mother edition by allowing david ray griffin 's response to cockburn to be published in their march 2007 issue . . advertising . although le monde diplomatique publishes few advertising in order to retain its editorial independence , it has sometimes been criticised for the quantity and nature of the published advertisements in november and december 2003 , two-page advertisements by ibm and a car manufacturer were placed . the issues of february and march 2004 contained advertising by microsoft in a '' social '' atmosphere with a picture of children , which led to agitation . « le monde diplomatique , publicitaire des multinationales ? » . meat atlas . le monde diplomatique co-publishes the meat atlas , which is an annual report on meat production and consumption . heinrich böll foundation , meat altas , download meat atlas as pdf . overseas . the friends of le monde diplomatique are a london-based society that promotes the english edition . it organises regular talks at the gallery in cowcross street , farringdon . references . external links . french edition and at exact editions with trial issue the french edition is accessible from 1954 to 1977 in gallica , the digital library of the bnf