Brachistochrone curve

history . johann bernoulli posed the problem of the brachistochrone to the readers of acta eruditorum in june , 1696 . johann bernoulli ( june 1696 ) '' problema novum ad cujus solutionem mathematici invitantur . '' ( a new problem to whose solution mathematicians are invited . ) , acta eruditorum , 18 : 269 . from p . 269 : '' datis in plano verticali duobus punctis a & b ( vid fig . 5 ) assignare mobili m , viam amb , per quam gravitate sua descendens & moveri incipiens a puncto a , brevissimo tempore perveniat ad alterum punctum b . '' ( given in a vertical plane two points a and b ( see figure 5 ) , assign to the moving body m , the path amb , by means of which — descending by its own weight and beginning to be moved by gravity from point a — it would arrive at the other point b in the shortest time . ) solutions to johann bernoulli 's problem of 1696 : isaac newton ( january 1697 ) '' de ratione temporis quo grave labitur per rectam data duo puncta conjungentem , ad tempus brevissimum quo , vi gravitatis , transit ab horum uno ad alterum per arcum cycloidis '' ( on a proof that the time in which a weight slides by a line joining two given points is the shortest in terms of time when it passes , via gravitational force , from one of these points to the other through a cycloidal arc ) , philosophical transactions of the royal society of london , 19 : 424-425 . g.g.l . ( gottfried wilhelm leibniz ) ( may 1697 ) '' communicatio suae pariter , duarumque alienarum ad edendum sibi primum a dn . jo . bernoullio , deinde a dn . marchione hospitalio communicatarum solutionum problematis curva celerrimi descensus a dn . jo . bernoullio geometris publice propositi , una cum solutione sua problematis alterius ab eodem postea propositi . '' ( his communication together with those of two others in a report to him first from johann bernoulli , and then from the marquis de l'hôpital , of reported solutions of the problem of the curve of quickest descent , which was publicly proposed by johann bernoulli , geometer — one with a solution of his other problem proposed afterwards by the same person . ) , acta eruditorum , 19 : 201–205 . johann bernoulli ( may 1697 ) '' curvatura radii in diaphanis non uniformibus , solutioque problematis a se in actis 1696 , p . 269 , propositi , de invenienda linea brachystochrona , id est , in qua grave a dato puncto ad datum punctum brevissimo tempore decurrit , & de curva synchrona seu radiorum unda construenda . '' ( the curvature of light rays in non-uniform media , and a solution of the problem which was proposed by me in the acta eruditorum of 1696 , p . 269 , from which is to be found the brachistochrone line i.e . , curve , that is , in which a weight descends from a given point to a given point in the shortest time , and on constructing the tautochrone or the wave of light rays . ) , acta eruditorum , 19 : 206–211 . jacob bernoulli ( may 1697 ) '' solutio problematum fraternorum , … '' ( a solution of my brother 's problems , … ) , acta eruditorum , 19 : 211–214 . marquis de l'hôpital ( may 1697 ) '' domini marchionis hospitalii solutio problematis de linea celerrimi descensus '' ( lord marquis de l'hôpital 's solution of the problem of the line of fastest descent ) , acta eruditorum , 19 : 217-220 . reprinted : isaac newton ( may 1697 ) '' excerpta ex transactionibus philos . anglic . m . jan . 1697 . '' ( excerpt from the english philosophical transactions of the month of january in 1697 ) , acta eruditorum , 19 : 223–224 . he said : bernoulli wrote the problem statement as : johann and his brother jakob bernoulli derived the same solution , but johann 's derivation was incorrect , and he tried to pass off jakob 's solution as his own . johann published the solution in the journal in may of the following year , and noted that the solution is the same curve as huygens 's tautochrone curve . after deriving the differential equation for the curve by the method given below , he went on to show that it does yield a cycloid . however , his proof is marred by his use of a single constant instead of the three constants , v m , 2g and d , below . bernoulli allowed six months for the solutions but none were received during this period . at the request of leibniz , the time was publicly extended for a year and a half . at 4 p.m . on 29 january 1697 when he arrived home from the royal mint , isaac newton found the challenge in a letter from johann bernoulli . newton stayed up all night to solve it and mailed the solution anonymously by the next post . upon reading the solution , bernoulli immediately recognized its author , exclaiming that he '' recognizes a lion from his claw mark '' . this story gives some idea of newton 's power , since johann bernoulli took two weeks to solve it . tom whiteside , newton the mathematician , in bechler , contemporary newtonian research , p . 122 . newton also wrote , '' i do not love to be dunned pestered and teased by foreigners about mathematical things . '' , and newton had already solved newton 's minimal resistance problem , which is considered the first of the kind in calculus of variations . in the end , five mathematicians responded with solutions : newton , jakob bernoulli , gottfried leibniz , ehrenfried walther von tschirnhaus and guillaume de l'hôpital . four of the solutions ( excluding l'hôpital 's ) were published in the same edition of the journal as johann bernoulli 's . in his paper , jakob bernoulli gave a proof of the condition for least time similar to that below before showing that its solution is a cycloid . according to newtonian scholar tom whiteside , in an attempt to outdo his brother , jakob bernoulli created a harder version of the brachistochrone problem . in solving it , he developed new methods that were refined by leonhard euler into what the latter called ( in 1766 ) the calculus of variations . joseph-louis lagrange did further work that resulted in modern infinitesimal calculus . earlier , in 1638 , galileo had tried to solve a similar problem for the path of the fastest descent from a point to a wall in his two new sciences . he draws the conclusion that the arc of a circle is faster than any number of its chords , this conclusion had appeared six years earlier in galileo 's dialogue concerning the two chief world systems ( day 4 ) . from the preceding it is possible to infer that the quickest path of all lationem omnium velocissimam , from one point to another , is not the shortest path , namely , a straight line , but the arc of a circle . consequently the nearer the inscribed polygon approaches a circle the shorter is the time required for descent from a to c . what has been proven for the quadrant holds true also for smaller arcs ; the reasoning is the same . just after theorem 6 of two new sciences , galileo warns of possible fallacies and the need for a '' higher science '' . in this dialogue galileo reviews his own work . the actual solution to galileo 's problem is half a cycloid . galileo studied the cycloid and gave it its name , but the connection between it and his problem had to wait for advances in mathematics . johann bernoulli 's solution . direct method . in a letter to henri basnage , held at the university of basel public library , dated 30 march 1697 , johann bernoulli stated that he had found two methods ( always referred to as '' direct '' and '' indirect '' ) to show that the brachistochrone was the '' common cycloid '' , also called the '' roulette '' . following advice from leibniz , he included only the indirect method in the acta eruditorum lipsidae of may 1697 . he wrote that this was partly because he believed it was sufficient to convince anyone who doubted the conclusion , partly because it also resolved two famous problems in optics which '' the late mr . huygens '' had raised in his treatise on light . in the same letter he criticised newton for concealing his method . in addition to his indirect method he also published the five other replies to the problem that he received . johann bernoulli 's direct method is historically important as it was the first proof that the brachistochrone is the cycloid . the method is to determine the curvature of the curve at each point . all the other proofs , including newton 's ( which was not revealed at the time ) are based on finding the gradient at each point . it was only in 1718 that bernoulli explained how he solved the brachistochrone problem by his direct method . bernoulli , johann . mémoires de l'académie des sciences ( french academy of sciences ) vol . 3 , 1718 , pp . 135–138 the early period of the calculus of variations , by p . freguglia and m . giaquinta , pp . 53–57 , . he explained that he had not published it in 1697 , for reasons which no longer applied in 1718 . this paper was largely ignored until 1904 when the depth of the method was first appreciated by constantin carathéodory , who stated that it shows that the cycloid is the only possible curve of quickest descent . according to him , the other solutions simply implied that the time of descent is stationary for the cycloid , but not necessarily the minimum possible . analytic solution . a body is regarded as sliding along any small circular arc ce between the radii kc and ke , with centre k fixed . the first stage of the proof involves finding the particular circular arc , mm which the body traverses in the minimum time . the line knc intersects al at n , and line kne intersects it at n , and they make a small angle cke at k . let nk a , and define a variable point , c on kn extended . of all the possible circular arcs ce , it is required to find the arc mm which requires the minimum time to slide between the 2 radii , km and km . to find mm bernoulli argues as follows . let mn x . he defines m so that md mx , and n so that mm nx + na and notes that x is the only variable and that m is finite and n is infinitely small . the small time to travel along arc mm is \frac which was shown above to be constant , and the brachistochrone is the cycloid . newton gives no indication of how he discovered that the cycloid satisfied this last relation . it may have been by trial and error , or he may have recognised immediately that it implied the curve was the cycloid . see also . aristotle 's wheel paradox beltrami identity calculus of variations catenary cycloid newton 's minimal resistance problem tautochrone curve trochoid uniformly accelerated motion . references . external links . brachistochrone ( at mathcurve , with excellent animated examples ) the brachistochrone , whistler alley mathematics . table iv from bernoulli 's article in acta eruditorum 1697 brachistochrones by michael trott and brachistochrone problem by okay arik , wolfram demonstrations project . the brachistochrone problem at mactutor geodesics revisited — introduction to geodesics including two ways of derivation of the equation of geodesic with brachistochrone as a special case of a geodesic . optimal control solution to the brachistochrone problem in python . the straight line , the catenary , the brachistochrone , the circle , and fermat unified approach to some geodesics .