Louis Vierne

life . louis vierne was born in poitiers on 8 october 1870 , the son of henri-alfred vierne ( 1828-1886 ) , a teacher , who became a journalist . he was editor-in-chief of the journal de la vienne in poitiers , where he met his future wife , marie-joséphine gervaz . the couple had four children . louis was born nearly blind due to congenital cataracts . his unusual gift for music was discovered early . when he was only two years of age , he heard the piano for the first time : a pianist played him a schubert lullaby , and after he had finished young louis promptly began to pick out the notes of the lullaby on the piano . from 1873 , his father worked for the paris-journal , moving with the family to paris . at age six , louis underwent an iridectomy in both eyes . he was then able to distinguish shapes and people , and could read large letters . he took piano lessons with madame gosset in lille , where his father worked for the lille memorial . she transcribed the music on large staves . he also learned braille . in 1880 , the family returned to paris where his father worked for several newspapers including le figaro . vierne studied the piano with louis specht , a blind teacher at the institut national des jeunes aveugles ( national institute for the young blind ) . he was impressed when listening to césar franck playing the organ in 1881 : vierne was accepted as a student of the institution in 1881 . franck recommended that he study the organ , and vierne began lessons with louis lebel and adolphe marty . he studied harmony privately with franck , and attended classes at the paris conservatoire , admitted as a full-time student in 1890 . when franck died on 8 november 1890 , charles-marie widor succeeded him . vierne became his assistant in the organ class and as organist at saint-sulpice . vierne was awarded first prize in the organ class of the conservatoire in 1894 . he remained assistant to widor in the organ class , and also to his successor alexandre guilmant from 1896 . in july 1898 , vierne was godfather at a baptism , and berthe arlette taskin the godmother . she was born in 1880 , and was a contralto singing who had worked with her father , the baritone and teacher at the conservatoire émile-alexandre taskin . vierne proposed to her on 18 july , and they got married on 20 april 1899 . widor was the organist in the church ceremony on 22 april at saint-sulpice . their first son , jacques , was born on 6 march 1900 . on 21 may 1900 , vierne won the competition for the position of titular organist at notre-dame de paris . on 11 september , he gave a recital together with his wife , as part of the world fair , exposition universelle . he held the post until his death in 1937 . although he held one of the most prestigious organ posts in france , the notre-dame organ was in a state of disrepair throughout much of his tenure at the instrument . he eventually undertook a concert tour of north america to raise money for its restoration . the tour , which included major recitals on the famous wanamaker organ in philadelphia and its smaller sister instrument , the wanamaker auditorium organ in new york city , was very successful , although the trip physically drained him . the friends of the wanamaker organ . the official friends of the wanamaker organ guide to philadelphia 's historic wanamaker grand organ . the friends of the wanamaker organ press : 1996 . when vierne 's mother died on 25 march 1902 , he moved to a larger flat on rue ses saints-pères . a second son , andré , was born on 6 january 1903 , and a daughter , collette , was born on 5 january 1907 . in 1906 , a street accident in paris caused him to badly fracture his leg , and it was briefly thought that his leg would need to be amputated . the leg was saved , but his recovery , and the task of completely re-learning his pedal technique , took a half a year . vierne obtained a divorce on 4 august 1909 , citing the infidelity of his wife . while she became custodian of the younger children , jacques remained with his father . vierne taught , as an assistant , at the conservatoire for nineteen years , where his to students included joseph bonnet , nadia boulanger , marcel dupré and henri mulet . he expected to succeed guilmant as head of the organ class , but instead , eugène gigout was appointed , succeeded in 1926 by dupré . vierne taught at the schola cantorum from 1912 . his students uniformly described him as a kind , patient and encouraging teacher . among his pupils were augustin barié , edward shippen barnes , lili boulanger , andré fleury , isadore freed , henri gagnebin , gaston litaize , édouard mignan , émile poillot , adrien rougier , alexander schreiner , and georges-émile tanguay . in the summer of 1913 , he was awarded two medals from the salon des musiciens . in the 1914 world war , his son jacques , still a minor , wished to enlist in the military , and he signed the necessary dispensation . vierne went to switzerland in 1916 for glaucoma treatment , expecting to be away for four months , with dupré deputy organist at notre-dame , but due to complications , he returned only four years later . in may 1917 , jacques was transferred to the 44th field regiment as a driver . he committed suicide on 12 november 1917 in prosne in the marne . vierne composed the piano quintet , op . 42 , in commemoration . his brother rené died at the front on 29 may 1918 , remembered in solitude , a poem for piano . vierne returned to paris in 1920 . a year later , he met madeleine richepin , a young singer for whom he set poems by baudelaire ( poème d'amour ) which they performed in concerts together . in june 1922 , he toured switzerland , italy and germany . in 1924 , he toured england and scotland , and played in lyon and brussels . in 1927 , he undertook a u.s . tour of three months with richepin . in 1928 , they spent the summer at a castle in angers , where he composed les angélus , orchestrated poème d'amour which they premiered in paris on 1 march 1930 ) , and began his lyrical drama antigone . after the death of vincent d'indy and the conflicts that followed , he left the schola cantorum for the césar franck school in 1931 . the government of france made vierne a chevalier de la legion d'honneur in 1931 . on 2 june 1937 , vierne gave his 1,750th organ recital at notre-dame . he completed the main concert , which members of the audience said showed him at his full powers ( '' as well as he has ever played '' ) , playing his '' stele pour un enfant défunt '' from his triptyque , op . 58 . the closing section was to be two improvisations on submitted themes . he read the first theme in braille , then selected the stops he would use for the improvisation . he suddenly pitched forward , and fell off the bench as his foot hit the low '' e '' pedal of the organ . he lost consciousness as the single note echoed throughout the church . he had thus fulfilled his oft-stated lifelong dream — to die at the console of the great organ of notre-dame . maurice duruflé , another major french organist and composer , was at his side at the time of his death . . music . : see list of compositions by louis vierne , : category : compositions by louis vierne vierne had an elegant , clean style of writing that respected form above all else . his harmonic language was romantically rich , but not as sentimental or theatrical as that of his early mentor césar franck . like all of the great fin de siècle french organists , vierne 's music was very idiomatic for his chosen instrument and has inspired most of the great parisian organist-composers who followed him . his output for organ includes six organ symphony , 24 fantasy pieces ( which includes his famous carillon de westminster ) , and vingt-quatre pièces en style libre , among other works . there are also several chamber works ( sonatas for violin and cello , a piano quintet and a string quartet for example ) , vocal and choral music , and a symphony ( vierne ) for orchestra . in 2003 german progressive rock band recorded an 18-minute version of vierne 's organ symphony no . 3 in f♯ minor , for their album melancholia , remarking in the liner notes that '' this symphony marks the beginning of a new movement , what we call 'rock and roll ' . '' '' welcome to my rock and roll '' , in melancholia ( 2003 , cd booklet , p.10 ) , musea . . discography . ; organ louis vierne : complete organ works : pierre cochereau & george c . baker ; solstice ; 7 cds louis vierne : complete organ works : christine kamp ; festivo ; 8 cds completed of 10 louis vierne : complete organ works : ben van oosten ; mdg ; 9 cds louis vierne : complete organ works : wolfgang rübsam ; ifo records , 2008 ) ; 8 cds organ symphonies nos . 1-6 : marc dubugnon ; aethon recordings ; intégrale des symphonies de louis vierne par marc dubugnon on youtube organ symphonies nos . 1-6 : martin jean ; loft recordings organ symphonies nos . 1-6 : david sanger ; meridian recordings organ symphonies nos . 1-6 : günther kaunzinger ; koch-schwann organ symphonies nos . 1-6 : jeremy filsell ; signum classics second symphony for organ : christopher houlihan 24 pièces de fantaisie : kaunzinger ; novalis ; 2 cds 24 pièces en style libre op . 31 : kaunzinger ; koch-schwann ; 2 cds ; choir and organ louis vierne : complete choral works : truro cathedral choir ; robert sharpe & christopher gray ; regent records ( 2008 ) messe solennelle : pierre pincemaille ( organ ) , ensemble de cuivres de l'opéra de paris , 1998 - forlane 16786 . ; other louis vierne : symphonie en la mineur , poème pour piano et orchestre – françois kerdoncuff , piano ; orchestre philharmonique de liège ; pierre bartholomée , conductor ; timpani ( 2007 ) louis vierne : la musique de chambre intégrale ( the complete chamber music ) – françois kerdoncuff , piano ; olivier gardon , piano ; alexis galpérine , violin ; odile carracilly , viola ; yvan chiffoleau , cello ; christian moreaux , oboe ; pascale zanlonghi , harp ; quartour phillips ; 2 cds ; timpani ( 2005 ) louis vierne : piano quintet op . 42 : stephen coombs , piano ; chilingirian quartet ; hyperion louis vierne : piano quintet op . 42 : tamara atschba , louise chisson , matthias adensamer , alexander znamensky , christophe pantillon ; gramola ( 2014 ) louis vierne : preludes for piano op . 38 : tamara atschba ; gramola ( 2014 ) louis vierne : l'œuvre pour piano ( works for piano ) – olivier gardon ; 2 cds ; timpani ( 1995 ) louis vierne : mélodies – mireille delunsch , soprano ; françois kerdoncuff ; christine icart , harp ; timpani ( 1997 ) louis vierne : mélodies ( volume i ) – delunsch ; kerdoncuff ; timpani ( 2005 ) louis vierne : songs : rachel santesso , soprano ; roger vignoles , piano ; andrew reid , organ ; hugh webb , harp ; deux-elles