Floyd Rose

history . floyd d . rose first started working on what became the floyd rose tremolo in 1976 . he was playing in a rock band at the time , inspired by jimi hendrix and deep purple . he frequently used the vibrato bar but could n't make his guitars stay in tune using traditional approaches like lubricating the nut , or winding the strings as little as possible around the tuning pegs . at the time , rose made and sold jewelry , and so had the skills and tools to fabricate small metal parts . after noticing the strings moved freely with the regular nut design , he made a brass nut that locked the strings in place with three u-shaped clamps . he installed this nut in his 1957 fender stratocaster . later he improved this design by using hardened steel—otherwise the strings wore the clamps down too quickly—and redesigned the bridge , which also locked the strings with clamps . rose hand-made the first bridges and nuts , which were quickly picked up by some influential guitarists at the time , such as eddie van halen . other well-known guitarists who picked it up early were neal schon , who purportedly got serial number 3 , brad gillis ( serial number 4 ) , and steve vai . the first patent was awarded in 1979 , & nbsp ; — bridge mechanism patent ; and shortly afterward , rose made an agreement with kramer guitars because he could no longer keep up with demand manufacturing the bridges by hand . kramer 's guitar models with the floyd rose bridge became very popular , leading them to drop the earlier rockinger vibrato in favor of the floyd rose between june 1982 and january 1983 . the floyd rose design 's popularity led to other companies making similar bridges , thus violating the patent . notably , courts found that the kahler tremolo system infringed on floyd rose 's patents , and awarded a judgment in excess of 100m against gary kahler . floyd rose and kramer went on to make licensing agreements with other manufacturers , and there are now several different models available based on the double-locking design . because the bridges and nuts were no longer hand-made it was necessary to update the design , and the bridges were changed to add a set of tuners that allow for fine-tuning the guitar after the strings are locked at the nut . & nbsp ; — first fine tuners and saddle patent ; & nbsp ; — second fine tuners and saddle patent ; in january 1991 , kramer 's exclusive distribution agreement with rose ended when fender announced they would be the new exclusive distributor of floyd rose products . while fender used floyd rose-licensed vibrato systems previously , this move allowed fender to offer a few models with the original floyd rose tremolo , such as the richie sambora in 1991 , the floyd rose classic stratocaster in 1992 and the set-neck floyd rose strat in 1993 . floyd rose collaborated with fender to design a fender deluxe locking tremolo , introduced in 1991 on the strat plus , the usa contemporary stratocaster , and the strat ultra . fender used the floyd rose-designed locking vibrato system on certain humbucker-equipped american deluxe and showmaster models until 2007 . in 2005 , distribution of the floyd rose original reverted to floyd rose , whereas the patented designs were licensed to other manufacturers to use . principles . position i illustrates the normal position of an ideally tuned floyd rose bridge . the bridge ( orange ) balances on a pivot point , being pulled counter-clockwise by the strings ' tension and clockwise by typically one to five springs . controlled by special tuning screws ( purple ) , these two forces are balanced such that the bridge 's surface is parallel to the guitar body ( olive ) . the strings are locked tightly with a special mechanism at the nut ( green ) as well as at the bridge ( turquoise ) , hence '' double-locking '' . position ii illustrates the position of the bridge when the vibrato arm is pushed down towards the guitar body . the bridge rotates around a pivot point counter-clockwise and the tension in each string decreases , lowering the pitch of each string . the sound of any notes being played becomes flat . while the tension of the strings decreases , the tension of the springs increases . it is the balance between string-tension and spring-tension , as well as the fact that the strings end at the bridge saddles and nut ( eliminating '' play '' in the string , which would negatively affect tuning ) , that brings the strings reliably back into tune when force on the bar is removed . position iii illustrates the position of the bridge when the vibrato arm is pulled up away from the guitar body . the bridge rotates clockwise , tension in the strings increases , the pitch of the sound increases and so notes sound sharper than normal . due to the limitations on the assembly 's movement imposed by the guitar 's body , the amount of available pitch change is much larger when the bar is depressed than when it is lifted . note that when using the vibrato bar , string action ( the distance between the strings and the fretboard ) is affected , and this can sometimes cause the strings to unintentionally touch the frets and create unwanted sounds on instruments set up with extremely low action and heavily recessed vibrato installations . advantages and disadvantages . the main advantage of the floyd rose vibrato system is its double-locking design . this makes the guitar stay in tune through large pitch changes , e.g . , forcing the vibrato bar all the way down to the guitar body , or pulling up on the bar to raise the tone by as much as a fifth or a seventh . a typical bridge set-up has it '' float '' —so the player can both raise and lower the pitch with the vibrato bar . however , if a string breaks , the balance of tensions on the bridge is disrupted , leaving the bridge out of position and therefore the guitar out of tune . moreover , since the tension of one string affects the tension of all the others , it can take several iterations through the tuning process before the instrument is tuned . some players , including eddie van halen , prefer to instead have a '' half-floating '' bridge , which allows only downwards motion . this means the cavity of the tremolo pocket is not fully milled away underneath—and if the tension of the rear springs is slightly stronger than the tension of the strings , the tremolo always rests flush with the body . in this set-up , a broken string has no effect on the pitch of the other strings , as the reduced overall string tension from the broken string does n't make the bridge move , since it already presses against the body of the guitar . this also allows fitting a device to the bridge that can drop the low e-string down to d to extend the tonal variety of the guitar , even during live performance . bending , however , still affects the rest of the strings , which makes some double-stop techniques more difficult to achieve . the bridge 's effect on the tone of the guitar is a topic of much disagreement . some players find that the floyd rose bridge has a '' thin '' tone , which has led to the development of replacement sustain blocks . these blocks are generally larger in size than the standard block and may be constructed from a similar brass alloy or an alternative like titanium or copper . according to reviews this modification might lead to a preferable change in the tonal quality of the guitar . . models and varieties . floyd rose original is the oldest model still in production . since 1977 , production models bearing this name are mostly the same as the first model , with only minor changes . note that the name '' floyd rose original '' is used to differentiate this system from '' floyd rose licensed '' . the first original floyds were double locking , but had no fine tuners , so players had to unclamp the nut every time they retuned the guitar . floyd rose ii is a lower end version of the original floyd used mostly on import and mid-range instruments . originally , floyd iis were single locking , locking only at the nut . later versions were made double locking , but used weaker materials than the original floyd rose , making them less dependable . floyd rose pro is a low-profile version of floyd rose original . the bridge and arm design is changed in such a way that the guitarist 's hand is generally closer to the strings while holding the vibrato arm . the bridge has a narrower string spacing ( 0.400 & nbsp ; inches or 10.16 & nbsp ; mm in this design versus 0.420 & nbsp ; inches or 10.66 & nbsp ; mm of the floyd rose original ) . floyd rose speedloader is a redesign developed in 1995–1999 and introduced around 2003 that combines floyd rose original with the speedloader system , and requires special strings and is manufactured under license of mccabe us patents for '' macrotuners '' , ie . full-range tuners . floyd rose 1000 and floyd rose special are made with the same design as the original but manufactured in south korea . the floyd rose 1000 is built with the same materials as the original , however the floyd rose special utilizes substitute materials such as zinc alloy saddles instead of steel and a zinc alloy sustain block instead of brass which significantly decreases the cost of the special model . fender deluxe locking tremolo . a specially designed system that was made by fender musical instruments corporation in 1991 in conjunction with floyd rose , utilizing locking tuners , a modified fender 2-point synchronized vibrato with locking bridge saddles and a special low-friction lsr roller nut that lets strings slide during vibrato use . this is a double locking system , except the other locking point is at the tuner instead of nut . floyd rose licensed models . previously , all similar double locking vibrato systems were produced under license from floyd rose , and marked as such , but in 2003 the relevant patents expired . yamaha finger clamp is a variety of floyd rose that have built-in levers , and thus when tuning , no allen keys are needed . available on the rgx520dz , rgx620dz and cv820 wes borland signature model . vigier floyd rose created by vigier guitars at the beginning of the '90s , this system uses force-tolerant needle bearings for improved wear on the bridge and enhanced tuning stability . the ball-bearing and global tuner features are manufactured under license to american inventor and recording artist , geoffrey lee mccabe—see u.s . patent nos . 6,175,066 5,965,831 , 6,891,094 , 5,986,191 , 6,563,034 and 7,470,841 . kahler 2700 series ( killer , steeler , and spyder ) made in the late 80 's by kahler , designed by david petschulat , this system used a knife-edge fulcrum bridge ( unlike the typical kahler cam system ) . the string locks at the bridge were embossed floyd rose lic . ibanez edge is ibanez 's floyd rose variant . there are 4 primary versions : edge , lopro edge , edgepro , and edgezero with numbered variants denoting budget models of the main lines , and also '' double '' variants of many of these , the moniker denoting the inclusion of piezo pickups . the edge and lopro edge were discontinued in 2003 but were subsequently reintroduced on the signature models of steve vai and joe satriani . ( some special edition guitars used these trems prior to their reintroduction ; however , the vibratos used were nos , rather than production runs . ) these two vibratos , whether old or new , bear a mark of floyd rose licensing , as they are produced using the same tooling , by japanese guitar parts manufacturer gotoh . ibanez zr uses a ball-bearing mechanic instead of knife-edge as the joint , and a stop-bar to help the guitar stay in tune after diving the vibrato . ibanez claims this system improves tuning stability after breaking a string . ibanez - zr tremolo guide these springs , including their orientation , are referred to as the zps system , with variants numbered 1 to 3 , and are also present as part of the edgezero design . the ball-bearing and global tuner features are manufactured under license to american inventor and recording artist , geoffrey lee mccabe—see u.s . patent nos . 6,175,066 5,965,831 , 6,891,094 , 5,986,191 , 6,563,034 and 7,470,841 . ibanez fixed edge , while it still uses the locking nut and locking bridge , was mounted on top of the body , and was used not as a vibrato system , but to provide a familiar feel to vibrato users , and even more tuning stability on a hardtailed guitar . popular use . the floyd rose tremolo rose to popularity in the early 1980s . many popular artists quickly adopted the device , making it difficult to measure how much each individual artist contributed to that popularity . most sources consider eddie van halen a pioneer of floyd rose usage . other players frequently cited as influential floyd rose users are steve vai , joe satriani , kirk hammett , brad gillis , tom morello , allan holdsworth , dimebag darrell reinventing the squeal and synyster gates . references . patents . floyd rose holds a number of patents on floating bridge design : & nbsp ; — bridge mechanism patent ; & nbsp ; — first fine tuners and saddle patent ; & nbsp ; — second fine tuners and saddle patent ; & nbsp ; — spring and claw mechanism ; & nbsp ; — early patent for a tremstopper device ; & nbsp ; — patent for floyd rose pro , low-profile version ; . external links . floyd rose website floyd rose interview for namm oral history program