Tribute

chinese practice of tributes as trade regulation and authority . in ancient china , the tribute system provided an administrative means to control their interests , as well as providing exclusive trading priorities to those who paid tribute from foreign regions . it was an integral part of the confucian philosophy , seen by the chinese as equivalent to younger sons looking after older parents by devoting part of their wealth , assets or goods to that purpose . political marriages have existed between the chinese empire and tribute states , such as songtsen gampo and wencheng ( gyasa ) . china often received tribute from the states under the influence of confucian civilization and gave them chinese products and recognition of their authority and sovereignty in return . there were several tribute states to the chinese-established empires throughout ancient history , including neighboring countries such as japan , korea , vietnam , cambodia , borneo , indonesia and central asia . this tributary system and relationship are well known as jimi ( 羈縻 ) or cefeng ( 冊封 ) , or chaogong ( 朝貢 ) . in japanese , the tributary system and relationship is referred to as shinkou ( 進貢 ) , sakuhou ( 冊封 ) and choukou ( 朝貢 ) . according to the chinese book of han , the various tribes of japan ( constituting the nation of wa ) had already entered into tributary relationships with china by the first century . book of the later han , '' 會稽海外有東鯷人 分爲二十餘國 '' however , japan ceased to present tribute to china and left the tributary system during the heian period without damaging economic ties . although japan eventually returned to the tributary system during the muromachi period in the reign of ashikaga yoshimitsu , it did not recommence presenting tribute . according to the korean historical document samguk sagi , goguryeo sent a diplomatic representative to the han dynasty in 32 ad , and emperor guangwu of han officially acknowledged goguryeo with a title . ≪삼국사기≫에 의하면 32년 ( 고구려 대무신왕 15 ) 에 후한으로 사신을 보내어 조공을 바치니 후한의 광무제 ( 光武帝 ) 가 왕호를 회복시켜주었다는 기록이 있다 ( « tang » 32 years , according to ( goguryeo daemusin 15 ) sent ambassadors to the generous tribute to the emperor guangwu of han emperor in abundance ( 光武帝 ) gave evidence that can restore wanghoreul -- google translation ? ) the tributary relationship between china and korea was established during the three kingdoms of korea , kwak , tae-hwan et al . ( 2003 ) . ; excerpt , '' korea 's tributary relations with china began as early as the fifth century , were regularized during the goryeo dynasty ( 918-1392 ) , and became fully institutionalized during the yi dynasty ( 1392-1910 ) . '' but in practice it was only a diplomatic formality to strengthen legitimacy and gain access to cultural goods from china . this continued under different dynasties and varying degrees until china 's defeat in the sino-japanese war of 1894–1895 . kwak , ; excerpt , '' the tributary relations between china and korea came to an end when china was defeated in the sino-japanese war of 1894-1895 . in fact , the present north korea is more or less serving as a tribute of china in the modern times ; '' lane , roger . ( 2008 ) . the relationship between china and vietnam was a '' hierarchic tributary system '' . china ended its suzerainty over vietnam with the treaty of tientsin ( 1885 ) following the sino-french war . thailand was always subordinate to china as a vassal or a tributary state since the sui dynasty until the taiping rebellion of the late qing dynasty in the mid-19th century . some list of tributaries of china encompasses suzerain kingdoms from china in east asia has been prepared . gundry , r . s . '' china and her tributaries , '' before the 20th century , the geopolitics of east and southeast asia were influenced by the chinese tributary system . this assured them their sovereignty and the system assured china the incoming of certain valuable assets . '' the theoretical justification '' for this exchange was the mandate of heaven , that stated the fact that the emperor of china was empowered by the heavens to rule , and with this rule the whole mankind would end up being beneficiary of good deeds . most of the asian countries joined this system voluntary . there is a clear differentiation between the term '' tribute '' and '' gift . '' the former , known as gong ( 貢 ) , has important connotations . the emperor of china made sure that the gifts they paid to other states were known as mere gifts , not tributes . even at times when a chinese dynasty had to bribe nomads from raiding their border such as in the han dynasty and the song dynasty , the emperors gave '' gifts '' to the xiongnu and the khitan . the only time when a dynasty paid formal tribute to another was during the southern song dynasty , where tribute was given to the jin dynasty for peace . the jin dynasty , having occupied the plains around the yellow river , also saw itself as the legitimate holder of the '' mandate of heaven '' . in addition , during treasure voyages , his fleet often returned with foreign envoys bearing tribute . the foreign states received gifts in return to build tributary relationships between the ming dynasty and the foreign kingdoms . tribute activities occupy several chapters in the twenty-four histories . western european notions of tribute in medieval times . raiders , like vikings and celtic tribes , could also exact tribute instead of raiding the place if the potential targets agreed to pay an agreed amount of valuables ; the danegeld is a famous and large-scale example . tribute was not always money , but also valuables , effectively making the payers hostages kept unpillaged in exchange for good behaviour . various medieval lords required tribute from their vassals or peasants , nominally in exchange for protection to incur the costs of raising armies , or paying for free-lance mercenaries against a hostile neighbouring state . that system evolved into medieval taxation and co-existed as a secular approximation of the churchly tithe levied on production . the islamic caliphate . the islamic caliphate introduced a new form of tribute , known as the 'jizya ' , that differed significantly from earlier roman forms of tribute . according to patricia seed : christians of the iberian peninsula translated the term 'jizya ' as tributo . this form of tribute was later also applied by the spanish empire to their territories in the new world . . tribute in the modern era . modern elements of tribute are restricted to highly formal and ceremonial rituals , such as formal gifts being given to prove either fealty or loyalty upon the inauguration of a president , a wedding of a president 's child while the president is in office , or the accession or the marriage of a member of a royal family . see also . imperial chinese tributary system list of recipients of tribute from china puppet state satellite state suzerainty