MPEG-1 Audio Layer II

history of development from mp2 to mp3 . musicam . mpeg-1 audio layer 2 encoding was derived from the musicam ( masking pattern adapted universal subband integrated coding and multiplexing ) audio codec , developed by centre commun d'études de télévision et télécommunications ( ccett ) , philips , and the institut für rundfunktechnik ( irt ) in 1989 as part of the eureka 147 pan-european inter-governmental research and development initiative for the development of a system for the broadcasting of audio and data to fixed , portable or mobile receivers ( established in 1987 ) . it began as the digital audio broadcast ( dab ) project managed by egon meier-engelen of the deutsche forschungs- und versuchsanstalt für luft- und raumfahrt ( later on called deutsches zentrum für luft- und raumfahrt , german aerospace center ) in germany . the european community financed this project , commonly known as eu-147 , from 1987 to 1994 as a part of the eureka research program . the eureka 147 system comprised three main elements : musicam audio coding ( masking pattern universal sub-band integrated coding and multiplexing ) , transmission coding & multiplexing and cofdm modulation . musicam was one of the few codecs able to achieve high audio quality at bit rates in the range of 64 to 192 kbit/s per monophonic channel . it has been designed to meet the technical requirements of most applications ( in the field of broadcasting , telecommunication and recording on digital storage media ) — low delay , low complexity , error robustness , short access units , etc . as a predecessor of the mp3 format and technology , the perceptual codec musicam is based on integer arithmetics 32 subbands transform , driven by a psychoacoustic model . it was primarily designed for digital audio broadcasting and digital tv , and disclosed by ccett ( france ) and irt ( germany ) in atlanta during an ieee-icassp conference . this codec incorporated into a broadcasting system using cofdm modulation was demonstrated on air and on the field together with radio canada and crc canada during the nab show ( las vegas ) in 1991 . the implementation of the audio part of this broadcasting system was based on a two chips encoder ( one for the subband transform , one for the psychoacoustic model designed by the team of g . stoll ( irt germany ) , later known as psychoacoustic model i in the iso mpeg audio standard ) and a real time decoder using one motorola 56001 dsp chip running an integer arithmetics software designed by y.f . dehery 's team ( ccett , france ) . the simplicity of the corresponding decoder together with the high audio quality of this codec using for the first time a 48 & nbsp ; khz sampling frequency , a 20 bits/sample input format ( the highest available sampling standard in 1991 , compatible with the aes/ebu professional digital input studio standard ) were the main reasons to later adopt the characteristics of musicam as the basic features for an advanced digital music compression codec such as mp3 . the audio coding algorithm used by the eureka 147 digital audio broadcasting ( dab ) system has been subject to the standardization process within the iso/moving pictures expert group ( mpeg ) in 1989–94 . musicam audio coding was used as a basis for some coding schemes of mpeg-1 and mpeg-2 audio . most key features of mpeg-1 audio were directly inherited from musicam , including the filter bank , time-domain processing , audio frame sizes , etc . however , improvements were made , and the actual musicam algorithm was not used in the final mpeg-1 audio layer ii standard . since the finalisation of mpeg-1 audio and mpeg-2 audio ( in 1992 and 1994 ) , the original musicam algorithm is not used anymore . the name musicam is often mistakenly used when mpeg-1 audio layer ii is meant . this can lead to some confusion , because the name musicam is trademarked by different companies in different regions of the world . ( musicam is the name used for mp2 in some specifications for astra digital radio as well as in the bbc 's dab documents . ) the eureka project 147 resulted in the publication of european standard , ets 300 401 in 1995 , for dab which now has worldwide acceptance . the dab standard uses the mpeg-1 audio layer ii ( iso/iec 11172-3 ) for 48 & nbsp ; khz sampling frequency and the mpeg-2 audio layer ii ( iso/iec 13818-3 ) for 24 & nbsp ; khz sampling frequency . . mpeg audio . in the late 1980s , iso 's moving picture experts group ( mpeg ) started an effort to standardize digital audio and video encoding , expected to have a wide range of applications in digital radio and tv broadcasting ( later dab , dmb , dvb ) , and use on cd-rom ( later video cd ) . . the musicam audio coding was one of 14 proposals for mpeg-1 audio standard that were submitted to iso in 1989 . the mpeg-1 audio standard was based on the existing musicam and aspec audio formats . digital video and audio broadcasting technology : a practical engineering guide ( signals and communication technology ) p . 144 : '' in the year 1988 , the mascam method was developed at the institut für rundfunktechnik ( irt ) in munich in preparation for the digital audio broadcasting ( dab ) system . from mascam , the musicam ( masking pattern universal subband integrated coding and multiplexing ) method was developed in 1989 in cooperation with ccett , philips and matsushita . '' the mpeg-1 audio standard included the three audio '' layers '' ( encoding techniques ) now known as layer i ( mp1 ) , layer ii ( mp2 ) and layer iii ( mp3 ) . all algorithms for mpeg-1 audio layer i , ii and iii were approved in 1991 as the committee draft of iso-11172 article 's reference 3 is : 'iso/iec jtc/sc29 , '' coded representation of picture , audio and multimedia/hypermedia information '' , committee draft of standard iso/iec 11172 , december 6 , 1991' . and finalized in 1992 as part of mpeg-1 , the first standard suite by mpeg , which resulted in the international standard iso/iec 11172-3 ( a.k.a . mpeg-1 audio or mpeg-1 part 3 ) , published in 1993 . further work on mpeg audio was finalized in 1994 as part of the second suite of mpeg standards , mpeg-2 , more formally known as international standard iso/iec 13818-3 ( a.k.a . mpeg-2 part 3 or backward compatible mpeg-2 audio or mpeg-2 audio bc ) , originally published in 1995 . mpeg-2 part 3 ( iso/iec 13818-3 ) defined additional bit rates and sample rates for mpeg-1 audio layer i , ii and iii . the new sampling rates are exactly half that of those originally defined for mpeg-1 audio . mpeg-2 part 3 also enhanced mpeg-1 's audio by allowing the coding of audio programs with more than two channels , up to 5.1 multichannel . the layer iii ( mp3 ) component uses a lossy compression algorithm that was designed to greatly reduce the amount of data required to represent an audio recording and sound like a decent reproduction of the original uncompressed audio for most listeners . emmy award in engineering . ccett ( france ) , irt ( germany ) and philips ( the netherlands ) won an emmy award in engineering 2000 for development of a digital audio two-channel compression system known as musicam or mpeg audio layer ii . . technical specifications . mpeg-1 audio layer ii is defined in iso/iec 11172-3 ( mpeg-1 part 3 ) sampling rates : 32 , 44.1 and 48 & nbsp ; khz bit rates : 32 , 48 , 56 , 64 , 80 , 96 , 112 , 128 , 160 , 192 , 224 , 256 , 320 and 384 kbit/s an extension has been provided in mpeg-2 audio layer ii and is defined in iso/iec 13818-3 ( mpeg-2 part 3 ) additional sampling rates : 16 , 22.05 and 24 & nbsp ; khz additional bit rates : 8 , 16 , 24 , 40 and 144 kbit/s mpeg multichannel - up to 5 full range audio channels and an lfe-channel ( low frequency enhancement channel ) the format is based on successive digital frames of 1152 sampling intervals with four possible formats : mono format stereo format intensity encoded joint stereo format ( stereo irrelevance ) dual channel ( uncorrelated ) format . variable bit rate . mpeg audio may have variable bit rate ( vbr ) , but it is not widely supported . layer ii can use a method called bit rate switching . each frame may be created with a different bit rate . iso mpeg audio subgroup , mpeg audio faq version 9 , mpeg-1 and mpeg-2 bc , retrieved on 2009-07-11 . according to iso/iec 11172-3:1993 , section 2.4.2.3 : to provide the smallest possible delay and complexity , the ( mpeg audio ) decoder is not required to support a continuously variable bit rate when in layer i or ii . twolame : mpeg audio layer ii vbr , retrieved on 2009-07-11 . . how the mp2 format works . mp2 is a sub-band coding , which means that compression takes place in the time domain with a low-delay filter bank producing 32 frequency domain components . by comparison , mp3 is a transform audio encoder with hybrid filter bank , which means that compression takes place in the frequency domain after a hybrid ( double ) transformation from the time domain . mpeg audio layer ii is the core algorithm of the mp3 standards . all psychoacoustical characteristics and frame format structures of the mp3 format are derived from the basic mp2 algorithm and format . the mp2 encoder may exploit inter channel redundancies using optional '' joint stereo '' intensity encoding . like mp3 , mp2 is a perceptual coding format , which means that it removes information that the human auditory system will not be able to easily perceive . to choose which information to remove , the audio signal is analyzed according to a psychoacoustic model , which takes into account the parameters of the human auditory system . research into psychoacoustics has shown that if there is a strong signal on a certain frequency , then weaker signals at frequencies close to the strong signal 's frequency can not be perceived by the human auditory system . this is called frequency masking . perceptual audio codecs take advantage of this frequency masking by ignoring information at frequencies that are deemed to be imperceptible , thus allowing more data to be allocated to the reproduction of perceptible frequencies . mp2 splits the input audio signal into 32 sub-bands , and if the audio in a sub-band is deemed to be imperceptible then that sub-band is not transmitted . mp3 , on the other hand , transforms the input audio signal to the frequency domain in 576 frequency components . therefore , mp3 has a higher frequency resolution than mp2 , which allows the psychoacoustic model to be applied more selectively than for mp2 . so mp3 has greater scope to reduce the bit rate . the use of an additional entropy coding tool , and higher frequency accuracy ( due to the larger number of frequency sub-bands used by mp3 ) explains why mp3 does not need as high a bit rate as mp2 to get an acceptable audio quality . conversely , mp2 shows a better behavior than mp3 in the time domain , due to its lower frequency resolution . this implies less codec time delay & nbsp ; — which can make editing audio simpler & nbsp ; — as well as '' ruggedness '' and resistance to errors which may occur during the digital recording process , or during transmission errors . the mp2 sub-band filter bank also provides an inherent '' transient concealment '' feature , due to the specific temporal masking effect of its mother filter . this unique characteristic of the mpeg-1 audio family implies a very good sound quality on audio signals with rapid energy changes , such as percussive sounds . because both the mp2 and mp3 formats use the same basic sub-band filter bank , both benefit from this characteristic . applications of mp2 . part of the dab digital radio and dvb digital television standards . layer ii is commonly used within the broadcast industry for distributing live audio over satellite , isdn and ip network connections as well as for storage of audio in digital playout systems . an example is npr 's prss content depot programming distribution system . the content depot distributes mpeg-1 l2 audio in a broadcast wave file wrapper . mpeg2 with riff headers ( used in . wav ) is specified in the riff/wav standards . as a result , windows media player will directly play content depot files , however , less intelligent . wav players often do not . as the encoding and decoding process would have been a significant drain on cpu resources in the first generations of broadcast playout systems , professional broadcast playout systems typically implement the codec in hardware , such as by delegating the task of encoding and decoding to a compatible soundcard rather than the system cpu . all dvd-video players in pal countries contain stereo mp2 decoders , making mp2 a possible competitor to dolby digital in these markets . dvd-video players in ntsc countries are not required to decode mp2 audio , although most do . while some dvd recorders store audio in mp2 and many consumer-authored dvds use the format , commercial dvds with mp2 soundtracks are rare . mpeg-1 audio layer ii is the standard audio format used in the video cd and super video cd formats ( vcd and svcd also support variable bit rate and mpeg multichannel as added by mpeg-2 ) . mpeg-1 audio layer ii is the standard audio format used in the mhp standard for set-top boxes . mpeg-1 audio layer ii is the audio format used in hdv camcorders . mp2 files are compatible with some portable audio players . naming and extensions . the term mp2 and filename extension . mp2 usually refer mpeg-1 audio layer ii data , but can also refer to mpeg-2 audio layer ii , a mostly backward compatible extension which adds support for surround sound , variable bit rate encoding , and additional sampling rates , defined in iso/iec 13818-3 . the abbreviation mp2 is also sometimes erroneously applied to mpeg-2 video or mpeg-2 aac audio . see also . mpeg-1 mpeg-1 audio layer i mp3 mpeg-2 mpeg-4 part 14 elementary stream musepack originally mp2-based , with numerous improvements . notes . references . genesis of the mp3 audio coding standard by hans georg musmann in ieee transactions on consumer electronics , vol . 52 , nr . 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 1043–1049 , august 2006 musicam source coding by yves-françois dehery , aes 10th international conference : kensington , london , england , ( 7-9 sept 1991 ) , pp 71–79 . external links . the history of mp3 from fraunhofer iis mpeg audio resources and software toolame – an mp2 encoder twolame – a fork of the toolame code rfc 3003 – the document defining mime type for mpeg-1 audio layer ii a mpeg audio layer ii decoder in 4k – source code for small open source decoder . official mpeg web site patent status of mpeg-1 , h.261 and mpeg-2 – some information about patents