Republic of Ireland Act 1948

text of act . the republic of ireland act is itself quite short , running to just five brief sections , and is therefore set out in full as follows : . british monarch . section 1 of the act repealed the executive authority ( external relations ) act 1936 . by doing so the act abolished the last remaining functions of the british monarch ( then george vi ) in relation to the irish state . these functions had related to the issuance and acceptance of letters of credence of diplomatic and consular representatives and the conclusion of international agreements . section 3 provides that the president of ireland may instead exercise these functions and any other functions in relation to the state 's external ( or foreign ) relations . the commonwealth . at the time the act came into force , the view of the irish taoiseach whose government brought in the act was that ireland did not have a king and had not been a member of the commonwealth since 1936 . taoiseach john a . costello speaking in the dáil - the republic of ireland bill , 1948 — second stage ; wednesday , 24 november 1948 where he said '' '' we were not since 1936 a member of the commonwealth of nations . '' his government 's view was that ireland was already a republic and that the act would not create a republic but rather achieve a '' clarification of ireland 's constitutional status . '' taoiseach john a . costello speaking in the dáil - the republic of ireland bill , 1948—second stage ; wednesday , 24 november 1948 where he said '' the clarification of our constitutional status achieved by the bill will enable us to partake in international relations in a way that has not heretofore been possible . '' these views were shared by the irish opposition leader of the time . opposition leader éamon de valera speaking in the dáil on the republic of ireland bill , 1948—second stage ; wednesday , 24 november 1948 indeed , irish leaders had on several previous occasions declared that ireland was a republic and not a commonwealth member , but that it was associated with the commonwealth . taoiseach éamon de valera speaking in the dáil 's committee on finance ; vote 65—external affairs ; tuesday , 17 july 1945 : '' we are an independent republic , associated as a matter of our external policy with the states of the british commonwealth . the irish view of things was not shared by the other members of the commonwealth . until ireland brought the act into force , it was still regarded by the members as forming part of “ his majesty ’ s dominions ” . when ireland adopted its 1937 constitution , which made no reference to the king , the united kingdom government announced that it and the other commonwealth governments were '' still prepared to treat.ireland , as a member of the british commonwealth of nations . ” opposition leader éamon de valera speaking in the dáil 's the republic of ireland bill , 1948—second stage ; wednesday , 24 november 1948 and quoting a united kingdom government statement of 1937 which read '' we here to-day are not proclaiming a republic anew ; we are not establishing a new state.we are simply giving a name to what exists — that is , a republican state '' after all , in their view , the king was still empowered by ireland to fulfill certain functions as ireland 's statutory agent under the external relations act 1936 . with that irish act now being repealed , there was no longer any basis , however tenuous , to consider ireland as continuing to have a king or to be part of his majesty ’ s dominions and therefore within the commonwealth . in their view , ireland had now declared itself a republic for the first time bringing its membership of the commonwealth to an end . the london declaration , which permitted republics to remain within the commonwealth , was made shortly afterwards in response to india 's desire to continue as a member once its new republican constitution was finalised . however , the irish government opted not to reapply for membership of the commonwealth , a decision that was criticised by then leader of the opposition éamon de valera , who considered applying for membership after being returned to power in the 1950s . . republic of ireland description . section 2 of the act quite simply provides : notably , the act did not change the official name of the state . it merely provided the description for the state . the constitution of ireland provides that éire ( or ireland in english ) is the official name of the state and , if the act had purported to change the name , it would have been unconstitutional as it was not a constitutional amendment . the distinction between a description and a name has sometimes caused confusion . the taoiseach , john a . costello , who introduced the republic of ireland bill in the oireachtas , explained the difference in the following way : . background . the act repealed the external relations act , 1936 . under that act , king george vi acted as the irish head of state in international relations by accredited ambassadors and on the state 's behalf accepted credentials appointing foreign ambassadors to the state . the republic of ireland act removed this last remaining practical role from the king and vested it instead in the president of ireland , making the then president of ireland , seán t . o'kelly , unambiguously the irish head of state . in 1945 , when asked if he planned to declare a republic , the then taoiseach éamon de valera had replied , '' we are a republic '' , '' seanad éireann - volume 30 - 19 july , 1945 '' office of the houses of the oireachtas . retrieved on 14 march 2007 . having refused to say so before for eight years . he also insisted that ireland had no king , but simply used an external king as an organ in international affairs . however , that was not the view of constitutional lawyers including de valera 's attorneys-general , whose disagreement with de valera 's interpretation only came to light when the state papers from the 1930s and 1940s were released to historians . nor was it the view in the international arena , who believed that ireland did have a king , george vi who had been proclaimed king of ireland in december 1936 , and to whom they accredited ambassadors to ireland . king george , in turn , as '' king of ireland '' accredited all irish diplomats . all treaties signed by the irish taoiseach or minister for external affairs were signed in the name of king george . in october 1947 , de valera asked his attorney-general , cearbhall ó dálaigh , to draft a bill to repeal the external relations act . and by 1948 a draft of the bill included a reference to the state as being a republic . in the end , the draft bill was never submitted to the oireachtas for approval . introduction of the bill . the bill to declare ireland a republic was introduced in 1948 by the new taoiseach , john a . costello of the fine gael party . costello made the announcement that the bill was to be introduced when he was in ottawa , during an official visit to canada . david mccullagh has suggested that it was a spur of the moment reaction to offence caused by the governor-general of canada , mccullagh , david the reluctant taoiseach gill and macmillan 2010 p.210 lord alexander , who was of northern irish descent , who allegedly placed loyalist symbols , notably a replica of the famous roaring meg cannon used in the siege of derry , before an affronted costello at a state dinner . what is certain is that an agreement that there would be separate toasts for the king and for the president of ireland was broken . mccullagh p.210 the irish position was that a toast to the king , instead of representing both countries , would not include ireland . only a toast to the king was proposed , to the fury of the irish delegation . shortly afterwards costello announced the plan to declare the republic . however , according to all but one of the ministers in costello 's cabinet , the decision to declare a republic had already been made before costello 's canadian visit . mccullagh pp.205-7 costello 's revelation of the decision was because the sunday independent ( an irish newspaper ) had discovered the fact and was about to '' break '' the story as an exclusive . nevertheless , one minister , noel browne , gave a different account in his autobiography , against the tide . he claimed costello 's announcement was done in a fit of anger of his treatment by the governor-general and that when he returned , costello , at an assembly of ministers in his home , offered to resign because of his manufacture of a major government policy initiative on the spot in canada . yet according to browne , all the ministers agreed that they would refuse to accept the resignation and also agreed to manufacture the story of a prior cabinet decision . the evidence of what really happened remains ambiguous . there is no record of a prior decision to declare a republic before costello 's canadian trip , among cabinet papers for 1948 , which supports browne 's claim . however , the costello government refused to allow the secretary to the government , maurice moynihan , to attend cabinet meetings and take minutes , because they believed he was too close to the opposition leader , éamon de valera . mccullagh pp.179-80 rather than entrust the minute-taking to moynihan , the cabinet entrusted it to a parliamentary secretary ( junior minister ) , liam cosgrave . given that cosgrave had never kept minutes before , his minutes , at least early on in the government , proved to be only a limited record of government decisions . so whether the issue was never raised , was raised but undecided on , was subjected to a decision taken informally , or was subjected to a decision taken formally , remains obscure on the basis of the 1948 cabinet documentation . at any rate , the act was enacted with all parties voting for it . de valera did suggest that it would have been better to reserve the declaration of the republic until irish unity had been achieved , a comment hard to reconcile with his 1945 claim that the irish state was already a republic . speaking in seanad éireann costello told senators that as a matter of law , the king was indeed '' king of ireland '' and irish head of state and the president of ireland was in effect no more than first citizen and a local notable , until the new law came into force . response . united kingdom . the united kingdom responded to the republic of ireland act by enacting the ireland act 1949 . this act formally asserted that the irish state had , when the republic of ireland act came into force , ceased “ to be part of his majesty ’ s dominions ” section 1 ( 1 ) of the ireland act 1949 and accordingly was no longer within the commonwealth . nonetheless the united kingdom statute provided that irish citizens would not be treated as aliens under british nationality law . this , in effect , granted them a status similar to the citizens of commonwealth countries . between the enactment of the constitution of ireland in 1937 and the enactment of the ireland act 1949 , the united kingdom had formally decided upon the ( anglicised ) '' eire '' as its name for the irish state . the 1949 act now provided that '' the part of ireland heretofore known as eire '' could be referred to in future uk legislation as the '' republic of ireland '' . ireland act 1949 , s . 1 . the uk 's continued aversion to using '' ireland '' as the names of the irish state due to the fact it did not ( and does not ) comprise the entirety of ireland remained a source of diplomatic friction for several decades afterwards . the uk 's ireland act also gave a legislative guarantee that northern ireland would continue to remain a part of the united kingdom unless the parliament of northern ireland formally expressed a wish to join a united ireland ; this '' unionist veto '' proved to be controversial during the act 's passage through westminster , as well as in the irish state and amongst northern ireland 's nationalist community . the guarantee was replaced in 1973 , when the parliament of northern ireland was abolished , by a new guarantee based on '' the consent of the majority of the people of northern ireland '' . northern ireland constitution act 1973 s.1 . on the day the act came into force , 18 april 1949 , king george vi sent the following message to the president of ireland , seán t . o'kelly : the times , 18 april 1949 . irish peers . from the acts of union 1800 , when the uk house of lords noted someone 's succession to an irish peerage , the clerk of the parliaments informed the clerk of the crown in ireland in dublin to update the electoral register for irish representative peers . such elections ceased in 1922 and the office of clerk of the crown was formally abolished in 1926 , when the last holder , gerald horan , became first master of the high court . nevertheless , the clerk of the parliaments continued to inform horan in the old manner until the irish government , reviewing administration for the commencement of the republic of ireland act , informed the lords in late 1948 that the clerk of the crown in ireland no longer existed . . church of ireland . the book of common prayer of the all-island church of ireland was modelled on that of the church of england and included three '' state prayers '' : for '' our most gracious sovereign lord , king george '' , the royal family , and the commonwealth . the church was historically associated with the protestant ascendancy and had been the established church until 1871 ; its '' southern '' membership ( one-third of the total ) was mostly unionist before 1922 and pro-british thereafter . in late 1948 , archbishops john gregg and arthur barton devised replacement prayers to be used in the new republic , at first temporarily until the 1949 general synod would update the book of common prayer . a grassroots campaign led by hugh maude of clondalkin opposed any change , and the 1950 synod authorised a compromise , whereby the old prayers remained in northern ireland , and the republic used a '' prayer for the president and all in authority '' and '' a prayer for king george the sixth . in whose dominions we are not accounted strangers '' ( an allusion to the ireland act 1949 ) . likewise , the liturgy for morning and evening prayers includes '' o lord , save the queen '' in northern ireland and '' o lord , guide and defend our rulers '' in the republic . miriam moffitt notes that maude 's supporters were mostly older church members . . reassessment . in 1996 , the constitution review group considered amending the constitution to declare that ireland should be named '' republic of ireland '' . it decided against recommending such an amendment . this was the second time that such an amendment was considered by committee . references . citations . . sources . ; primary : ; secondary : stephen collins , the cosgrave legacy tim pat coogan , de valera ( hutchinson , 1993 ) brian farrell , de valera 's constitution and ours f.s.l . lyons , ireland since the famine david gwynn morgan , constitutional law of ireland tim murphy and patrick twomey ( eds . ) ireland 's evolving constitution : 1937 & ndash ; 1997 collected essays ( hart , 1998 ) alan j . ward , the irish constitutional tradition : responsible government and modern ireland 1782 & ndash ; 1992 ( irish academic press , 1994 ) . external links . the republic of ireland act 1948 : oireachtas debates republic of ireland act 1948 , 2013 documentary from rté radio 1