Boll weevil

description . the adult insect has a long snout , is grayish color , and is usually less than 6 & nbsp ; mm long . lifecycle . thumb adult weevils overwinter in well-drained areas in or near cotton fields , and farms after diapause . they emerge and enter cotton fields from early spring through midsummer , with peak emergence in late spring , and feed on immature cotton bolls . the boll weevil lays its eggs inside buds and ripening bolls ( fruits ) of the cotton plants . the female can lay up to 200 eggs over a 10- to 12-day period . the oviposition leaves wounds on the exterior of the flower bud . the eggs hatch in 3 to 5 days within the cotton squares ( larger buds before flowering ) , feed for 8 to 10 days , and finally pupate . the pupal stage lasts another 5 to 7 days . the lifecycle from egg to adult spans about three weeks during the summer . under optimal conditions , 8 to 10 generations per season may occur . boll weevils begin to die at temperatures at or below −5 & nbsp ; °c ( 23 & nbsp ; °f ) . research at the university of missouri indicates they can not survive more than an hour at −15 & nbsp ; °c ( 5 & nbsp ; °f ) . the insulation offered by leaf litter , crop residues , and snow may enable the beetle to survive when air temperatures drop to these levels . other limitations on boll weevil populations include extreme heat and drought . its natural predators include fire ants , insects , spiders , birds , and a parasitic wasp , catolaccus grandis . the insects sometimes emerge from diapause before cotton buds are available . infestation . thumb the insect crossed the rio grande near brownsville , texas , to enter the united states from mexico in 1892 and reached southeastern alabama in 1909 . by the mid-1920s , it had entered all cotton-growing regions in the u.s . , travelling 40 to 160 miles per year . it remains the most destructive cotton pest in north america . since the boll weevil entered the united states , it has cost u.s . cotton producers about 13 billion , and in recent times about 300 million per year . economic impacts of the boll weevil : the boll weevil contributed to the economic woes of southern farmers during the 1920s , a situation exacerbated by the great depression in the 1930s . the boll weevil appeared in venezuela in 1949 and in colombia in 1950 . the amazon rainforest was thought to present a barrier to its further spread , but it was detected in brazil in 1983 , and an estimated 90 % of the cotton farms in brazil are now infested . during the 1990s , the weevil spread to paraguay and argentina . the international cotton advisory committee has proposed a control program similar to that used in the u.s . . control . during early years of the weevil 's presence , growers sought relatively warm soils and early-ripening cultivars . following world war ii , the development of new pesticides such as ddt enabled u.s . farmers again to grow cotton as an economic crop . ddt was initially extremely effective , but u.s . weevil populations developed resistance by the mid-1950s . methyl parathion , malathion , and pyrethroids were subsequently used , but environmental and resistance concerns arose as they had with ddt , and control strategies changed . while many control methods have been investigated since the boll weevil entered the united states , insecticides have always remained the main control methods . in the 1980s , entomologists at texas a & m university pointed to the spread of another invasive pest , the red imported fire ant , as a factor in the weevils ' population decline in some areas . other avenues of control that have been explored include weevil-resistant strains of cotton , the parasitic wasp catolaccus grandis , the fungus beauveria bassiana , and the chilo iridescent virus . genetic engineering bt cotton is not protected from the boll weevil . bt susceptibility of insect species image : '' beat the boll weevil.with a little more care at every step you- not the weevils- get the crop . get a good cotton . - nara - 512572.jpg '' beat the boll weevil . '' ( u.s . food administration , educational div . , advertising section , 1918-1919 ) image : boll weevil eradication.jpg eradication map ( usda , 2006 ) although it was possible to control the boll weevil , to do so was costly in terms of insecticide costs . the goal of many cotton entomologists was to eventually eradicate the pest from u.s . cotton . in 1978 , a large-scale test was begun in eastern north carolina and in southampton county , virginia , to determine the feasibility of eradication . based on the success of this test , area-wide programs were begun in the 1980s to eradicate the insect from whole regions . these are based on cooperative effort by all growers together with the assistance of the animal and plant health inspection service of the united states department of agriculture ( usda ) . the program has been successful in eradicating boll weevils from all cotton-growing states with the exception of texas , and most of this state is free of boll weevils . problems along the southern border with mexico have delayed eradication in the extreme southern portions of this state . follow-up programs are in place in all cotton-growing states to prevent the reintroduction of the pest . these monitoring programs rely on pheromone-baited traps for detection . the boll weevil eradication program , although slow and costly , has paid off for cotton growers in reduced pesticide costs . this program and the cochliomyia of the 1950s are among the biggest and most successful insect control programs in history . . impact . the library of congress american memory project contains a number of oral history materials on the boll weevil 's impact . a 2009 study found '' that as the weevil traversed the american south in the period 1892-1932 , it seriously disrupted local economies , significantly reduced the value of land ( at this time still the most important asset in the american south ) , and triggered substantial intraregional population movements . '' a 2020 journal of economic history study found that the boll weevil spread between 1892 and 1922 had a beneficial impact on educational outcomes , as children were less likely to work on cultivating cotton . a 2020 nber paper found that the boll weevil spread contributed to fewer lynchings , less confederate monument construction , less kkk activity , and higher non-white voter registration . the boll weevil infestation has been credited with bringing about economic diversification in the southern us , including the expansion of peanut cropping . the citizens of enterprise , alabama , erected the boll weevil monument in 1919 , perceiving that their economy had been overly dependent on cotton , and that mixed farming '' history of enterprise '' . city of enterprise , alabama . archived from the original on 2013-07-03 . retrieved december 21 , 2020 . and manufacturing were better alternatives . in popular culture . in their landmark self-titled debut album , the presidents of the united states of america ( band ) made reference to a wide range of animals including on the track , boll weevil . music critic michael sun wrote , '' by the time track five , ‘ boll weevil ’ , rolls around , there ’ s been enough cameos from birds , spiders , monkeys , fish , frogs , pigs , and beetles to fill a zoo , all referenced without agenda or coded meaning — just fun , plain and simple . '' the boll weevil is the mascot for the university of arkansas at monticello and is listed on several '' silliest '' or '' weirdest '' mascots of all time . it was also the mascot of a short-lived minor league baseball team , the temple boll weevils , which were alternatively called the '' cotton bugs . '' '' boll weevil '' is a traditional blues song which reached 2 on the billboard chart in 1961 in a recording by brook benton . in the popular animated show ben 10 , one of the protagonist 's transformations is a beetle-like insect named '' ball weevil '' . in the 3rd season episode , '' night of the headless woman '' from the 1960s series , the wild wild west features boll weevils as the macguffin . the villains were trying to smuggle boll weevils into the country to ruin cotton production in the united states . '' charançon armageddon '' by french band '' cocotte '' tells a fictional story of the boll weevil at the beginning of the 20th century in alabama . see also . lixus concavus , the rhubarb curculio weevil female sperm storage black belt in the american south . references . notes further reading dickerson , willard a . , et al . , ed . boll weevil eradication in the united states through 1999 . the cotton foundation , memphis , tn 2001 . 627 pp . lange , fabian , alan l . olmstead , and paul w . rhode , '' the impact of the boll weevil , 1892–1932 '' , journal of economic history , 69 ( sept . 2009 ) , 685–718 . external links . texas boll weevil eradication foundation boll weevil life cycle boll weevil biology arkansas boll weevil eradication foundation hunter and coad , '' the boll-weevil problem '' , u.s . department of agriculture farmers ' bulletin , ( 1928 ) . hosted by the university of north texas libraries digital collections alabama tourism board boll weevil in georgia a 1984 paper on the effect of a parasitic wasp on the boll weevil