Hilbert's second problem

hilbert 's problem and its interpretation . in one english translation , hilbert asks : '' when we are engaged in investigating the foundations of a science , we must set up a system of axioms which contains an exact and complete description of the relations subsisting between the elementary ideas of that science . but above all i wish to designate the following as the most important among the numerous questions which can be asked with regard to the axioms : to prove that they are not contradictory , that is , that a definite number of logical steps based upon them can never lead to contradictory results . in geometry , the proof of the compatibility of the axioms can be effected by constructing a suitable field of numbers , such that analogous relations between the numbers of this field correspond to the geometrical axioms . on the other hand a direct method is needed for the proof of the compatibility of the arithmetical axioms . '' from the english translation by m . newson , 1902 provided by . hilbert 's statement is sometimes misunderstood , because by the '' arithmetical axioms '' he did not mean a system equivalent to peano arithmetic , but a stronger system with a second-order completeness axiom . the system hilbert asked for a completeness proof of is more like second-order arithmetic than first-order peano arithmetic . as a nowadays common interpretation , a positive solution to hilbert 's second question would in particular provide a proof that peano arithmetic is consistent . there are many known proofs that peano arithmetic is consistent that can be carried out in strong systems such as zermelo–fraenkel set theory . these do not provide a resolution to hilbert 's second question , however , because someone who doubts the consistency of peano arithmetic is unlikely to accept the axioms of set theory ( which is much stronger ) to prove its consistency . thus a satisfactory answer to hilbert 's problem must be carried out using principles that would be acceptable to someone who does not already believe pa is consistent . such principles are often called finitism because they are completely constructive and do not presuppose a completed infinity of natural numbers . gödel 's second incompleteness theorem ( see gödel 's incompleteness theorems ) places a severe limit on how weak a finitistic system can be while still proving the consistency of peano arithmetic . gödel 's incompleteness theorem . gödel 's second incompleteness theorem shows that it is not possible for any proof that peano arithmetic is consistent to be carried out within peano arithmetic itself . this theorem shows that if the only acceptable proof procedures are those that can be formalized within arithmetic then hilbert 's call for a consistency proof can not be answered . however , as nagel and newman ( 1958:96 & ndash ; 99 ) explain , there is still room for a proof that can not be formalized in arithmetic : : '' this imposing result of godel 's analysis should not be misunderstood : it does not exclude a meta-mathematical proof of the consistency of arithmetic . what it excludes is a proof of consistency that can be mirrored by the formal deductions of arithmetic . meta-mathematical proofs of the consistency of arithmetic have , in fact , been constructed , notably by gerhard gentzen , a member of the hilbert school , in 1936 , and by others since then . but these meta-mathematical proofs can not be represented within the arithmetical calculus ; and , since they are not finitistic , they do not achieve the proclaimed objectives of hilbert 's original program . the possibility of constructing a finitistic absolute proof of consistency for arithmetic is not excluded by gödel ’ s results . gödel showed that no such proof is possible that can be represented within arithmetic . his argument does not eliminate the possibility of strictly finitistic proofs that can not be represented within arithmetic . but no one today appears to have a clear idea of what a finitistic proof would be like that is not capable of formulation within arithmetic . '' a similar quotation with minor variations in wording appears in the 2001 edition p.107-108 , as revised by douglas r . hofstadter , new york university press , ny , . . gentzen 's consistency proof . in 1936 , gentzen published a proof that peano arithmetic is consistent . gentzen 's result shows that a consistency proof can be obtained in a system that is much weaker than set theory . gentzen 's proof proceeds by assigning to each proof in peano arithmetic an ordinal number , based on the structure of the proof , with each of these ordinals less than epsilon zero . actually , the proof assigns a '' notation '' for an ordinal number to each proof . the notation is a finite string of symbols that intuitively stands for an ordinal number . by representing the ordinal in a finite way , gentzen 's proof does not presuppose strong axioms regarding ordinal numbers . he then proves by transfinite induction on these ordinals that no proof can conclude in a contradiction . the method used in this proof can also be used to prove a cut elimination result for peano arithmetic in a stronger logic than first-order logic , but the consistency proof itself can be carried out in ordinary first-order logic using the axioms of primitive recursive arithmetic and a transfinite induction principle . tait ( 2005 ) gives a game-theoretic interpretation of gentzen 's method . gentzen 's consistency proof initiated the program of ordinal analysis in proof theory . in this program , formal theories of arithmetic or set theory are assigned ordinal numbers that measure the consistency strength of the theories . a theory will be unable to prove the consistency of another theory with a higher proof theoretic ordinal . modern viewpoints on the status of the problem . while the theorems of gödel and gentzen are now well understood by the mathematical logic community , no consensus has formed on whether ( or in what way ) these theorems answer hilbert 's second problem . simpson ( 1988 : sec . 3 ) argues that gödel 's incompleteness theorem shows that it is not possible to produce finitistic consistency proofs of strong theories . kreisel ( 1976 ) states that although gödel 's results imply that no finitistic syntactic consistency proof can be obtained , semantic ( in particular , second-order ) arguments can be used to give convincing consistency proofs . detlefsen ( 1990 : p . & nbsp ; 65 ) argues that gödel 's theorem does not prevent a consistency proof because its hypotheses might not apply to all the systems in which a consistency proof could be carried out . dawson ( 2006 : sec . 2 ) calls the belief that gödel 's theorem eliminates the possibility of a persuasive consistency proof '' erroneous '' , citing the consistency proof given by gentzen and a later one given by gödel in 1958 . see also . takeuti conjecture . notes . . references . dawson , john w . ( 2006 ) '' shaken foundations or groundbreaking realignment ? a centennial assessment of kurt gödel ’ s impact on logic , mathematics , and computer science '' . 2006 21st annual ieee symposium on logic in computer science , ieee , pp . & nbsp ; 339 & ndash ; 341 . torkel franzen ( 2005 ) , godel 's theorem : an incomplete guide to its use and abuse , a.k . peters , wellesley ma . gerhard gentzen ( 1936 ) . '' die widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen zahlentheorie . '' mathematische annalen , v . 112 , pp . & nbsp ; 493 & ndash ; 565 . translated in jean van heijenoort , 1967 . from frege to gödel : a source book on mathematical logic . harvard university press : 596-616 . david hilbert 1900 ( 1901 ) '' mathematische probleme '' . archiv der mathematik und physik , v . 3 n . 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 44 & ndash ; 63 and 213 & ndash ; 237 . english translation , maby winton , bulletin of the american mathematical society 8 ( 1902 ) , 437 & ndash ; 479 . available online at . nagel , ernest and newman , james r . , godel 's proof , new york university press , 1958 . available online at . william w . tait ( 2005 ) . '' gödel 's reformulation of gentzen 's first consistency proof of arithmetic : the no-counterexample interpretation . '' bulletin of symbolic logic v . 11 n . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 225 & ndash ; 238 . . external links . original text of hilbert 's talk , in german english translation of hilbert 's 1900 address : a definition of a '' finitary formal system '' is given by goldstein ( p . 144 , footnote 7 ) : : : '' . finitary formal systems . formal systems with a finite or denumerable ( or countable ) alphabet of symbols , wffs well-formed-formulas of finite length , and rules of inference involving only finitely many premises . ( logicians also work with formal systems with uncountable alphabets , with infinitely long wffs , and with proofs having infinitely many premises . '' ( p . 144 , footnote 7 ) -- >