Minster (church)

etymology . the word minster ( old english mynster ) was a rendering of the latin monasterium , from greek '' μοναστήριον '' ( '' monasterion '' ) . in early english sources , monasterium and mynster were used interchangeably . they were applied to all communities who had devoted their lives to christian observance , regardless of the gender of the occupants or the activities in which said occupants typically engaged . monasterium was for instance applied equally to a small community of men living away from other secular settlements , to a large community of men and women living in a planned enclosure designed around a church , and to a widow and her unmarried daughters living in seclusion . the modern english term '' monastery '' does not express the same connotations as the latin monasterium , from which it derives , or the old english mynster . this is because the term has come to be associated with contemplative regularity , such as that observed by the benedictine or cistercian orders , although this does not apply to the situation in anglo-saxon england prior to the tenth century . by the tenth century , a gradual distinction between a '' church '' and a '' mynster '' began to emerge . for instance , in the leechdoms , the sixteenth day was propitious for establishing a mynster , and the sixth day of the moon for founding a church . this suggests that by the tenth and eleventh centuries , mynster was being used to refer to a '' superior church '' which was regarded as long-established and to which people paid their dues . an early appearance was in the ecclesiastical history of the venerable bede ( 731 ) . . history . early and mid anglo-saxon periods . the first minsters in the english-speaking parts of britain were founded in the century after the gregorian mission led by augustine of canterbury in 597 . the first cases for which documentary evidence has been preserved are oswy 's programme of 654/5 , in which he endowed 12 small minsters , and a gift from alhfrith to wilfrid in around 660 to accompany the foundation of the minster at ripon . an expansion of monasteries began around 670 , with many substantial royal gifts of land . kings made grants of land to named individuals to found a minster . in 734 bede wrote a letter to ecgbert ( archbishop of york ) , warning that noble families were abusing the privileged legal status accorded to the clergy , by making excessive landed endowments to minsters under their control . this reduced the overall stock of lands carrying the obligations of military service to the northumbrian state . alan thacker states : : the term 'minster ' was applied by the anglo-saxons to all religious communities , whether of monks proper or of secular clergy , a usage which reflects the fact that many early anglo-saxon monasteries had assumed the pastoral role which was ultimately the principal distinction of the secular college . early anglo-saxon monks might baptize , preach , and administer the sacraments to the laity in their locality , and distinctions were further blurred by the existence of 'double monasteries ' of nuns and secular clerks . in the last resort , however , monks could be free of pastoral obligations , while the secular minster always had its parish ( 'parochia ' ) over which it exercised extensive and well-defined rights , including control over baptism and burial and the receipt of various financial dues such as church-scot and tithe . the word derives from the old english '' mynster '' , meaning '' monastery '' , '' nunnery '' , '' mother church '' or '' cathedral '' , itself derived from the latin '' monasterium '' and the ancient greek '' μοναστήριον '' , meaning a group of clergy where the brothers would cloister themselves to meditate . thus , '' minster '' could apply to any church whose clergy followed a formal rule : as for example a monastery or a chapter ; or to a church served by a less formal group of clergy living communally . in the earliest days of the english church , from the 6th to the 8th centuries , minsters , in their various forms , constituted the only form of christian institution with a permanent site . at the beginning of the period , they were the only form of permanent collective settlement in a culture that had not developed towns or cities . kings , nobles and bishops were continually on the move , with their respective retinues , from estate to estate . minsters were commonly founded by the king or by a royal thegn , receiving a royal charter and a corporate endowment of bookland and other customary agricultural rights and entitlements within a broad territory ; as well as exemption from certain forms of customary service ( especially military ) . the superior of the minster was generally from the family of the founder . the minster 's primary purpose was to support the king and the thegn in the regular worship of the divine office ; especially through intercession in times of war . minsters are also said to have been founded , or extensively endowed , in expiation for royal crimes ; as for example minster-in-thanet near ramsgate . minsters might acquire pastoral and missionary responsibilities , for instance the three minsters of north-east herefordshire , leominster , bromyard and ledbury , joe hillaby , ledbury , a medieval borough , logaston 2nd ed . 2005 all active in their areas before the towns were founded on episcopal manors ; but initially this appear to have been of secondary importance . in the 9th century , almost all english minsters suffered severely from the depredations of viking invaders ; and even when a body of clergy continued , any form of regular monastic life typically ceased . the important role of minsters in the organisation of the early christian church in anglo-saxon england has been called the '' minster hypothesis '' . late saxon and norman periods . following the english recovery in the 10th century , surviving minsters were often refounded in accordance with the new types of collective religious bodies then becoming widespread in western europe , as monasteries following the reformed benedictine rule , or as collegiate churches or cathedral chapters following the rule of chrodegang of metz . consequently , by the 11th century , a hierarchy of minsters became apparent ; cathedral churches , or head minsters having pre-eminence within a diocese ; surviving old minsters being pre-eminent within an area broadly equivalent to an administrative hundred ; while newer lesser minsters and field churches were increasingly proliferating on local estates ; the difference being that lesser minsters had graveyards , where field churches did not . of particular importance for these developments , was the royal enforcement in this period of tithe as a compulsory religious levy on arable production . this vastly increased the resources available to support clergy ; but at the same time strongly motivated local landowners to found their own local churches , so as to retain tithe income within their own estates . in the 11th and 12th centuries former lesser minsters and field churches , typically served by individual priests , developed into the network of parishes familiar to this day . the old minsters mostly then were designated as parish churches . for these parish churches , their former pre-eminence was acknowledged by the occasional retention of the honorific title ; and sometimes by the continued recognition of former estate churches within their ancient territories as being , in some degree , of subsidiary status and dignity . otherwise however , old minsters might continue collective worship as collegiate churches ; their clergy initially being designated as 'portioners ' , as each canon was supported by a set portion of the college 's endowment income . during the 11th and 12th centuries many such former minsters were provided with new statutes by which their endowments were split between their complement of canons , such that each canonry then became a 'prebend ' ; but otherwise numbers of former minsters continued as 'portioner ' colleges through the medieval period . late 20th- and 21st-century additions . the church of england has designated additional minsters in the 20th and 21st centuries , by adding an honorific title to existing parish churches . these have included dewsbury ( 1994 ) , sunderland minster ( 1998 ) , preston ( 2003 ) , rotherham ( 2004 ) , stoke ( 2005 ) , and newport ( 2008 ) . st andrew 's church , plymouth became a minster church in late 2009 . the parish church of st . john the baptist in halifax , west yorkshire was elevated to minster status in november 2009 . grimsby minster in grimsby was dedicated as a minster on 16 may 2010 . croydon parish church was rededicated as croydon minster on 29 may 2011 by the bishop of southwark . the elevation of two churches in the diocese of norwich was announced in october 2011 : st margaret 's church kings lynn and st nicholas , great yarmouth . leeds parish church became leeds minster on 2 september 2012 . '' leeds parish church to become minster '' , bbc news , 20 february 2012 st mary 's church , cheltenham became cheltenham minster on 3 february 2013 . '' st mary 's church becomes cheltenham minster '' , bbc news , 3 february 2013 holy trinity , hull became a minster on 13 may 2017 . . current . footnotes . sources .