Caller ID

calling-line identification . in some countries , the terms caller display , calling line identification presentation ( clip ) , call capture , or just calling line identity are used ; call display is the predominant marketing name used in canada ( although some customers still refer to it colloquially as '' caller id '' ) . the concept of calling number identification as a service for pots subscribers originated from automatic number identification ( ani ) as a part of toll free number service in the united states . however , caller id and ani are not equivalent services . ani was originally a service in a non-electronic central office that identified the telephone number of the line from which a call was originated . previous to this , the calling number could not be identified electronically . in addition to the caller 's telephone number , caller id may also transmit the subscriber 's name , when available . the name can be passed on by the originating central office , or it is obtained from a line information database by the terminating switch . if no name is available , the city , state , province , or other designation may be sent . some of these databases may be shared among several companies , each paying every time a name is '' extracted '' . it is for this reason that mobile phone callers appear as '' wireless caller '' , or the location where the phone number is registered . the displayed caller id also depends on the equipment originating the call . if the call originates on a pots line ( a standard loop-start line ) , then caller id is provided by the service provider 's local switch . since the network does not connect the caller to the callee until the phone is answered , generally the caller id signal can not be altered by the caller . most service providers , however , allow the caller to block caller id presentation through the vertical service code 67 . a call placed behind a private branch exchange ( pbx ) has more options . in the typical telephony environment , a pbx connects to the local service provider through primary rate interface ( pri ) trunks . generally , although not absolutely , the service provider simply passes whatever calling line id appears on those pri access trunks transparently across the public switched telephone network ( pstn ) . this opens up the opportunity for the pbx administrator to program whatever number they choose in their external phone number fields . some ip phone services ( itsps , or internet telephony service providers ) support pstn gateway installations throughout the world . these gateways egress calls to the local calling area , thus avoiding long distance toll charges . itsps also allow a local user to have a number located in '' foreign '' exchange ; the new york caller could have a los angeles number , for example . when that user places a call , the calling line id would be that of a los angeles number , although they are actually located in new york . this allows a call return without having to incur long distance calling charges . with cellphones , the biggest issue appears to be in the passing of calling line id information through the network . cellphone companies must support interconnecting trunks to a significant number of wireline and pstn access carriers . cli localisation . calling line identity ( cli ) localisation is the process of presenting a localised calling line identity to the recipient of a telephone call . cli localisation is used by various organisations , including call centres , debt collectors and insurance companies . cli localisation allows companies to increase their contact rate by increasing the chance that a called party will answer a phone call . because a localised cli is displayed on the called party 's device , the call is perceived as local and recognisable to the caller rather than a withheld , unknown or premium rate number . the presented telephone number is adjusted depending on the area code of the dialed number . in 2020 , the eastern district of texas found a single missed call using a localized number was enough trigger article iii standing under telephone consumer protection act ( tcpa ) . the court reasoned , '' at issue in this case is a missed call , not a single , unsolicited text message . it only takes one glance at a text message to recognize it is for an extended warranty for a car you have never owned or a cruise you have won from a raffle you never entered . a missed call with a familiar area code , on the other hand , is more difficult to immediately dismiss as an automated message . '' . history . in 1968 , theodore paraskevakos , while working in as a communications engineer for sita formerly known as société internationale de télécommunication aéronautique in athens , greece , began developing a system to automatically identify a telephone caller to a call recipient . after several attempts and experiments , he developed the method in which the caller 's number was transmitted to the receiver 's device . this method was the basis for modern-day caller id technology . from 1969 through 1975 , paraskevakos was issued twenty separate patents related to automatic telephone line identification , patent 3,727,003/4-10-1973 and patent 3,812,296/5-21-1974 and since they significantly predated all other similar patents , they appear as prior art in later uspto issued to kazuo hashimoto patent 4,242,539/12-30-1980 and carolyn a . doughty . patent 4,551,581/11-5-1985 and patent 4,582,956/4-15-1986 ; ( both assigned to at & t bell laboratories ) thumb in 1971 , paraskevakos , working with boeing in huntsville , alabama , constructed and reduced to practice a transmitter and receiver , representing the world 's first prototypes of caller-identification devices . they were installed at peoples ' telephone company in leesburg , alabama , and were demonstrated to several telephone companies . these original and historic working models are still in the possession of paraskevakos . in the patents related to these devices , paraskevakos also proposed to send alphanumeric information , such as the caller 's name , to the receiving apparatus and to make mobile banking feasible . he also proposed to identify the calling telephone by special code ; e.g . , '' pf '' for public phone , '' ho '' for home phone , '' of '' for office phone , '' pl '' for police . in may 1976 , kazuo hashimoto , a prolific japanese inventor with over one thousand patents worldwide , phonetel patent services : : history : hashimoto first built a prototype of a caller id display device that could receive caller id information . his work on caller id devices and early prototypes was received in the smithsonian institution , national museum of american history in 2000 . u.s . patent 4,242,539 , filed originally on may 8 , 1976 , and a resulting patent re-examined at the patent office by at & t , was successfully licensed to most of the major telecommunications and computer companies in the world . initially , the operating telephone companies wanted to have the caller id function performed by the central office as a voice announcement and charged on a per-call basis . john harris , an employee of northern telecom 's telephone set manufacturing division in london , ontario , promoted the idea of displaying caller id on a telephone . the telephone was coded eccs for enhanced custom calling services . a video of his prototype was used to leverage the feature from the central office to the telephone set . in 1977 , the brazilian inventor valdir bravo salinas filed a patent application for a caller id device at the brazilian patent and trademarks office ( inpi ) . the patent was issued in 1982 as patent pi7704466 and is the first patent issued for a caller id equipment in brazil . later in 1980 , two other brazilian inventors , joão da cunha doya and nélio josé nicolai , filed patent applications for other caller id devices . doya ’ s application was filed on may 2 , 1980 and issued as patent pi8003077 . nicolai ’ s application was filed on july 2 , 1980 and rejected for being a copy of salinas ' invention . in 1981 another application for a caller id equipment was filed at the inpi by josé daniel martin catoira and afonso feijó da costa ribeiro neto . this application was granted and the patent issued as patent pi8106464 . the first market trial for caller id and other '' custom local area signaling services '' ( class ) was conducted by bell atlantic in may 1984 . bell communications research ( bellcore ) named the service '' caller id '' . the other regional bell operating companies later adopted the name and eventually became the generally accepted name in the united states . planning for the trial was initiated by a team in bell laboratories , at & t , and western electric before the bell system divestiture , with the participation of bell atlantic . the purpose of these trials was to assess the revenue potential of services that depend on deployment of the common channel signaling network needed to transmit the calling number between originating and terminating central offices . trial results were analyzed by bellcore members of the original team . in 1987 , bell atlantic ( now verizon communications ) conducted another market trial in hudson county , new jersey , which was followed by limited deployment . bellsouth was the first company to deploy caller id in december 1988 in memphis , tennessee , with a full deployment to its nine-state region over the next four years . bell atlantic was the second local telephone company to deploy caller id in new jersey 's hudson county , followed by us west communications ( now centurylink ) in 1989 . type ii caller id . in 1995 , bellcore released another type of modulation , similar to bell 202 , in which it became possible to transmit caller id information and even provide call-disposition options while the user was already on the telephone . this service became known in some markets as call waiting id , or ( when it was combined with call-disposition options ) call waiting deluxe ; it is technically referred to as analog display services interface . '' call waiting deluxe '' is the bellcore ( now telcordia technologies ) term for type ii caller id with disposition options . this class-based pots-telephone calling feature works by combining the services of call waiting with caller id but also introduces an '' options '' feature that , in conjunction with certain screen-based telephones , or other capable equipment , gives a telephone user the option to switch : place the current call on hold to take the second call ( not a new feature ) hang-up : disconnect the current call and take the second call ( not a new feature ) please hold : send the caller either a custom or telephone-company-generated voice message asking the caller to hold forward to voice mail : send the incoming caller to the recipient ’ s voice mail service . join : add the incoming caller to the existing conversation . data checksum digit d1 d2 d3 d4 s1 s2 s3 s4 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 3 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 4 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 5 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 6 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 7 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 8 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 9 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 a 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 b 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 c 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 fsk mark 1200 & nbsp ; hz space 2200 & nbsp ; hz 1200 bpsk . operation . in the united states , caller id information is sent to the called party by the telephone switch as an analog data stream ( similar to data passed between two modems ) , using bell 202 modulation between the first and second rings , while the telephone unit is still on hook . if the telephone call is answered too quickly after the first ring , caller id information may not be transmitted to the recipient . also , in the united states a caller may block the number they are calling from by dialing 67 before dialing the phone number . this will not work when dialing an '' 800 '' number where the receiver of the call pays for the call . there are two types of caller id : number only and name+number . number-only caller id is called single data message format ( sdmf ) , which provides the caller 's telephone number , the date and time of the call . name+number caller id is called multiple data message format ( mdmf ) , which in addition to the information provided by sdmf format , can also provide the directory listed name for the particular number . caller id readers which are compatible with mdmf can also read the simpler sdmf format , but an sdmf caller id reader will not recognize an mdmf data stream , and will act as if there is no caller id information present , e.g . as if the line is not equipped for caller id . instead of sending the caller id in between the first and second ring , some systems ( such as in the uk ) use line reversal to announce the caller id , or caller id signals are simply sent without any announcement . instead of bell 202 , the european alternative v.23 is sometimes used , ( without the 75-baud reverse channel ) or the data is sent using dtmf signalling . in general , cid as transmitted from the origin of the call is only the calling party 's full phone number ( including area code , and including international access code and country code if it 's an international call ) . the calling party name is added by the consumer 's terminating central office if the consumer has subscribed to that service . calling name delivery is not automatic . a query ( dip ) with signalling system 7 ( ss7 ) query may be initiated by the called party 's central office to retrieve the information for calling name delivery to the caller id equipment at the subscriber 's location , if the caller 's name has not already been associated with the calling party 's line at the originating central office . canadian systems ( depending on the provider ) using ccs7 automatically ( but not in all cases ) send the calling name with the call set-up and routing information at the time of the call . to look up the name associated with a phone number , the carrier in some instances has to access that information from a third-party database , and some database providers charge a small fee for each access to such databases . this cnam dip fee is very small – less than a penny per call . at & t starts their negotiations for cnam dip fees at about . 004 per lookup . opencnam fees are a bit more expensive , up to . 0048 per lookup . to avoid such charges , some carriers will report the name as '' unavailable '' , or will report the name as '' ( city ) , ( state ) '' based on the phone number , particularly for wireless callers . for toll-free numbers , they may report a string such as if the name is not available in a database . smartphones can use a third-party mobile app to do the name lookup in a third-party database . uses . telemarketing . telemarketing organisations often spoof caller id . in some instances , this is done to provide a '' central number '' for consumers to call back , such as a toll-free number , rather than having consumers call back the outbound call center where the call actually originated . however , some telemarketers block or fraudulently spoof caller id to prevent being traced . it is against united states federal law for telemarketers to block or to send misleading caller id . individuals may file civil suits and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) can fine companies or individuals for illegally spoofing or blocking caller id . . mobile providers . most mobile phone providers used the caller id to automatically connect to voice mail when a call to the voice mail number was made from the associated mobile phone number , bypassing the need to enter a password . while this was convenient for many users , because of spoofing , this practice has been replaced by more secure authentication by many carriers . regional differences . caller id transmission is implemented using different technologies and standards in some countries . in the united states the bellcore fsk standard is prevalent , whereas taiwan uses etsi fsk . sometimes individual service providers within a country use different standards . caller id converters can be used to translate from one standard to another . on gsm mobile networks , callers may dial 31 to enable caller id on all subsequent calls . caller id spoofing . caller id spoofing is the practice of causing the telephone network to display a number on the recipient 's caller id display that is different than that of the actual originating station . many telephone services , such as isdn pri based pbx installations , and voice over ip services , permit the caller to configure customized caller id information . in corporate settings this permits the announcement of switchboard number or customer service numbers . caller id spoofing may be illegal in some countries or in certain situations . dip fee fraud . a consumer 's telephone company must pay a small fee for the caller id text that is transmitted during a call . the fee is called a cnam dip fee . it is named a dip fee because the called party 's carrier pays a fee to dip into the originating telephone company 's database to get the caller id information . several companies engage in generating dip fees by catering to companies that make a large number of outbound calls . callerid4u and pacific telecom communications group cater to telemarketers and generate revenue on fees from caller id information . the telemarketers enter into an agreement with companies like callerid4u and pacific telecom communications group and share the revenue produced during the telemarketing call . dip fees vary wildly . according to doug mcintyre , the wholesale rates are on the order of 0.002 to 0.006 per database dip . and according to aaron woolfson , president of telswitch inc , the fee structure for dip fee fraud can include : the carriers pay a fee of 0.003 per call or 300 per 100,000 calls to the database owner the database owner pays the number dealers 0.0024 per call or 240 per 100,000 calls the number dealers share revenue with the robocaller 0.00096 or 96 per 100,000 calls consumers face significant barriers to exiting a call list and often can not have themselves removed from the list . calling the opt-out numbers often results in a fast-busy so the call never completes and the consumer remains on the list . according to reports companies like callerid4u has thousands of phone numbers and thousands of ftc complaints filed against them each month for violating do not call registration . the large number of phone numbers dilute the number of complaints against the company and phone number . . notes . the inverse feature , giving the number originally dialed , is known as direct inward dialing , direct dialing inward , or dialed number identification service . this tells the pbx where to route an incoming call , when there are more internal lines with external phone numbers than there are actual incoming lines in a large company or other organisation . not all types of caller identification use 202-type modulation , nor do all systems send the information between the first and second ring , e.g . , british telecom sends the signal before the first ring , after a polarity reversal in the line . ( because of this most caller id software is not compatible with bt even if the modem is . ) as a result , not all caller id devices are compatible from country to country or in the same country , even though the basic phone system is the same . some providers use fsk , others use the dtmf protocol . see also . calling name presentation local number portability location routing number truth in caller id act of 2009 . references . external links . report and order from the fcc on implementing the telephone consumer protection act of 1991 , including rules and discussion of caller id issues . '' caller id information '' at privacy corps technical details of caller id additional mdmf details