1965 in politics

events . january . january 14 - the prime minister of northern ireland and the taoiseach of the republic of ireland meet for the first time in 43 years . january 20 - lyndon b . johnson is sworn in for a full term as president of the united states . january 20 - indonesia president sukarno announces the withdrawal of the indonesian government from the united nations . february . february 18 - the gambia becomes independent from the united kingdom . february 21 - african-american muslim minister and human rights activist malcolm x is assassinated in new york city . february 23 - herberts cukurs , a latvian aviator , mass murderer and former nazi collaborator is unofficially executed by mossad . . march . march 7 - bloody sunday : some 200 alabama state troopers attack 525 civil rights demonstrators in selma , alabama , as they attempt to selma to montgomery marches . march 8 - some 3,500 united states marines arrive in da nang , south vietnam , becoming the first american ground combat troops in vietnam . march 9 - the second attempt , known as '' turnaround tuesday '' , to march from selma to montgomery , alabama , under the leadership of martin luther king jr . , stops at the bridge that was the site of bloody sunday , to hold a prayer service and return to selma . march 16 - police clash with 600 student nonviolent coordinating committee marchers in montgomery , alabama . march 17 - in response to the events of march 7 and 9 in selma , alabama , president lyndon b . johnson sends a bill to congress that forms the basis for the voting rights act of 1965 . it is passed by the senate may 26 , the house july 10 , and signed into law by president johnson august 6 . march 18 - a united states federal judge rules that sclc has the lawful right to march to montgomery , alabama , to petition for 'redress of grievances ' . march 20 - the indo-pakistani war of 1965 begins . march 22 – nicolae ceaușescu becomes the first secretary of the romanian communist party , after the death of previous leader gheorghe gheorghiu dej earlier that year . march 23 - 1965 moroccan riots in morocco , joined by discontented masses , is met with violent police and military repression . march 25 - martin luther king jr . and 25,000 civil rights activists successfully complete the 4-day march from selma , alabama , to the capitol in montgomery . march 30 - the second odeca charter , signed on december 12 , 1962 , becomes effective . april . april 9 - the west german parliament extends the statute of limitations on nazi war crime . april 17 - the first students for a democratic society march against the vietnam war draws 25,000 protestors to washington , d.c . april 24 - the 1965 yerevan demonstrations start in yerevan , demanding recognition of the armenian genocide . april 24 - in the dominican republic , officers and civilians loyal to deposed president juan bosch against the right-wing junta running the country , setting up a provisional government . forces loyal to the deposed military-imposed government stage a countercoup the next day , and civil war breaks out april 28 - u.s . troops occupy the dominican republic . april 29 - australia announces that it is sending an infantry battalion to support the south vietnam government . may . may 1 - bob askin replaces jack renshaw as premier of new south wales . may 12 - west germany and israel establish diplomatic relations . may 22 - several hundred vietnam war protesters in berkeley , california , march to the draft board again to burn 19 more cards . lyndon johnson is hung in effigy . june . june 10 - vietnam war – battle of dong xoai : about 1,500 viet cong mount a mortar attack on đồng xoài , overrunning its military headquarters and the adjoining militia compound . june 19 - houari boumediene 's revolutionary council ousts ahmed ben bella , in a bloodless coup in algeria . june 20 - police in algiers break up demonstrations by people who have taken to the streets chanting slogans in support of deposed president ahmed ben bella . june 22 - the treaty on basic relations between japan and the republic of korea is signed in tokyo . july . july 1 - the commonwealth is created . july 15 - greek prime minister georgios papandreou and his government are dismissed by king constantine ii . july 26 - the maldives receive full independence from great britain . july 27 - edward heath becomes leader of the british conservative party . july 28 - u.s . president lyndon b . johnson announces his order to increase the number of united states troops in south vietnam from 75,000 to 125,000 , and to more than double the number of men drafted per month - from 17,000 to 35,000 . july 30 - u.s . president lyndon b . johnson signs the social security act of 1965 into law , establishing medicare and medicaid . august . august 4 - the cook islands becomes a free new zealand-associated state , with its own constitution . august 6 - u.s . president lyndon b . johnson signs the voting rights act of 1965 into law , outlawing literacy test and other discriminatory voting practices . august 9 - singapore leaves malaysia . august 11 - the watts riots begin in los angeles , ending on the 16th after resulting in 34 deaths and over 3,000 arrests . august 18 - vietnam war – operation starlite : 5,500 united states marines destroy a viet cong stronghold on the van tuong peninsula in quảng ngãi province , in the first major american ground battle of the war . august 19 - at the conclusion of the frankfurt auschwitz trials , 66 ex-ss personnel receive life sentence , 15 others smaller ones . august 20 - jonathan myrick daniels , an episcopal seminarian from keene , new hampshire , is murdered in hayneville , alabama , while working in the civil rights movement . august 31 - president johnson signs a law penalizing the burning of draft cards with up to 5 years in prison and a 1,000 fine . september . september 2 - pakistan troops enter the indian sector of kashmir , while indian troops try to invade lahore . september 9 - u.n . secretary general u thant negotiates with pakistan president ayub khan . september 9 - u thant recommends china for united nations membership . september 9 - the united states department of housing and urban development is established . september 14 - the fourth and final period of the second vatican council opens . september 16 - china protests against indian provocations in its border region . september 16 - in iraq , prime minister arif abd ar-razzaq 's attempted coup fails . september 17 - king constantine ii of greece forms a new government with prime minister stephanos stephanopoulos , in an attempt to end a 2-year-old political crisis . september 18 - soviet premier alexei kosygin invites the leaders of india and pakistan to meet in the soviet union to negotiate . september 19 - pakistani forces achieve a decisive victory at the battle of chawinda , ultimately halting the indian advance and successfully stabilizing the sialkot front . september 21 - gambia , maldives and singapore are admitted as members of the united nations . september 24 - the british governor of aden cancels the constitution and takes direct control of the protectorate , due to the bad security situation . september 28 - fidel castro announces that anyone who wants to can emigrate to the united states . september 30 - the indonesia army , led by general suharto , crushes an alleged communist coup attempt ( see transition to the new order and 30 september movement ) . october . october 3 - fidel castro announces that che guevara has resigned and left the country . october 3 - u.s . president lyndon b . johnson signs the immigration and nationality act of 1965 which ends quotas based on national origin . october 4 - prime minister ian smith of rhodesia and arthur bottomley of the commonwealth of nations begin negotiations in london . october 5 - pakistan severs diplomatic relations with malaysia because of disagreement in the un . october 8 - indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 : the indonesian army instigates the arrest and execution of communists which last until next march . october 9 - a brigade of south korean soldiers arrive in south vietnam . october 12 - the u.n . recommends that the united kingdom try everything to stop a rebellion in rhodesia . october 12 - per borten replaces einar gerhardsen as prime minister of norway . october 13 - congo president joseph kasavubu fires prime minister moise tshombe and forms a provisional government , with évariste kimba in a leading position . october 15 - vietnam war : the catholic worker movement stages an anti-war protest in manhattan . one draft card burner is arrested , the first under the new law . october 16 - anti-war protests draw 100,000 in 80 u.s . cities and around the world october 18 - the indonesian government outlaws the communist party of indonesia . october 20 - ludwig erhard is re-elected chancellor of west germany ( he had first been elected in 1963 ) . october 21 - the organization of african unity meets in accra , ghana . october 22 - african countries demand that the united kingdom use force to prevent rhodesia from declaring unilateral independence . october 22 - colonel christophe soglo stages a second coup in dahomey . october 24 - british prime minister harold wilson and commonwealth secretary arthur bottomley travel to rhodesia for negotiations . october 25 - the soviet union declares its support of african countries in case rhodesia unilaterally declares independence . october 26 - anti-government demonstrations occur in the dominican republic . october 27 - süleyman demirel of ap forms the new government of turkey ( 30th government ) . october 27 - brazil president humberto de alencar castelo branco removes power from parliament , legal courts and all opposition parties . october 28 - french foreign minister maurice couve de murville travels to moscow . october 28 - mehdi ben barka , a moroccan politician , is kidnapped in paris and never seen again october 28 - pope paul vi promulgates nostra aetate , a '' declaration on the relation of the ( roman catholic ) church with non-christian religions '' by the second vatican council which includes a statement that jews are not collectively responsible for the death of jesus . october 30 - in washington , d.c . , a pro-vietnam war march draws 25,000 . november . november 2 - republican john lindsay is elected mayor of new york city . november 2 - quaker norman morrison , 32 , sets himself on fire in front of the pentagon ; he dies of his injuries . november 3 - french president charles de gaulle announces ( just short of his 75th birthday ) that he will stand for re-election . november 5 - martial law is announced in rhodesia . the united nations general assembly accepts british intent to use force against rhodesia if necessary by a vote of 82–9 . november 8 - vietnam war – operation hump : the united states army 173rd airborne is ambushed by over 1,200 viet cong november 8 - the british indian ocean territory is created , consisting of chagos archipelago , aldabra , farquhar and desroches islands . november 8 - the murder ( abolition of death penalty ) act 1965 is given royal assent , suspending the death penalty for murder in the united kingdom . november 9 -in new york city , 22-year-old catholic worker movement member roger allen laporte sets himself on fire in front of the united nations building in protest against the vietnam war . november 11 - in rhodesia ( modern-day zimbabwe ) , the white-minority government of ian smith unilaterally declares de facto independence november 12 - a un security council resolution ( voted 10–0 ) recommends that other countries not recognize independent rhodesia . november 14 - battle of ia drang : in the ia drang valley of the central highlands in vietnam , the first major engagement of the war between regular united states and north vietnam forces begins . november 20 - the united nations security council recommends that all states stop trading with rhodesia . november 22 - the united nations development programme ( undp ) is established as a specialized agency of the united nations . november 23 - soviet general mikhail kazakov assumes command of the warsaw pact . november 24 - congolese lieutenant general mobutu ousts joseph kasavubu and declares himself president . november 26 - at the hammaguir launch facility in the sahara desert , france launches a diamant a rocket with its first satellite , astérix-1 on board , becoming the third country to enter outer space . november 27 - tens of thousands of vietnam war protesters picket the white house , then march on the washington monument . november 27 - the pentagon tells u.s . president lyndon b . johnson that if planned major sweep operations to neutralize viet cong forces during the next year are to succeed , the number of american troops in vietnam will have to be increased from 120,000 to 400,000 . november 28 - vietnam war : in response to u.s . president lyndon b . johnson 's call for '' more flags '' in vietnam , philippines president-elect ferdinand marcos announces he will send troops to help fight in south vietnam . december . december 1 - the border security force is established in india as a special force to guard the borders . december 3 - the first british aid flight arrives in lusaka ; zambia had asked for british help against rhodesia . december 3 - members of the organization of african unity decide to sever diplomatic relations with the united kingdom , unless the british government ends the rebellion of rhodesia by mid-december . december 5 - the '' glasnost meeting '' in moscow becomes the first spontaneous political demonstration , and the first demonstration for civil rights in the soviet union december 8 - rhodesian prime minister ian smith warns that rhodesia will resist a trade embargo by neighboring countries with force . december 8 - the race relations act becomes the first legislation to address racial discrimination in the uk . december 8 - the second vatican council closes . december 15 - the caribbean free trade association ( carifta ) is formed . december 15 - tanzania and guinea sever diplomatic relations with the united kingdom . december 17 - the british government begins an oil embargo against rhodesia ; the united states joins the effort . december 20 - the world food programme is made a permanent agency of the united nations . december 21 - the soviet union announces that it has shipped rockets to north vietnam . december 21 - in west germany , konrad adenauer resigns as chairman of the christian democratic party . december 21 - the united nations adopts the international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination . december 22 - a military coup is launched in dahomey . december 25 - the yemen nasserist unionist people 's organisation is founded in ta'izz . december 28 - italian foreign minister amintore fanfani resigns . december 30 - president kenneth kaunda of zambia announces that zambia and the united kingdom have agreed on a deadline before which the rhodesian white government should be ousted . december 30 - ferdinand marcos becomes president of the philippines . december 31 - jean-bédel bokassa takes power in the central african republic . deaths . january 24 . winston churchill , former prime minister of the united kingdom ( 1940–1945 ) and ( 1951–1955 ) . february 21 . malcolm x african-american muslim minister and human rights activist is assassinated in new york city . march 11 . james reeb , an american unitarian universalism minister , pastor , and activist during the civil rights movement . while participating in the selma to montgomery marches he was murdered by white segregationists . . references .