Vuk Branković

origins . branković was born in 1345 , and belonged to a serb noble family which held a prominent role under the nemanjić dynasty in the 13th and 14th century . vuk was a son of branko mladenović ( died before 1365 ) , who received the high court title of sevastokrator from emperor stefan dušan ( r . 1331–1355 ) and served as governor of ohrid ( present day macedonia ) . vuk 's grandfather was mladen ( died after 1326 ) , who was župan ( count ) in trebinje under king stefan milutin ( 1282–1321 ) and vojvoda ( duke ) under king stefan dečanski ( 1321–1331 ) . later chronicles alleged that the branković descended from vukan nemanjić , son of stefan nemanja . expansion . thumb after their father 's death , vuk and his brothers grgur and nikola radonja were forced by king vukašin mrnjavčević to leave their land in western macedonia ( ohrid ) , and they retreated to the valley of drenica ( central kosovo ) . from there vuk , who only held the humble title of gospodin ( lord , sir ) , started to expand his realm and to create his own state . he took advantage of the death of king vukašin in the battle of maritsa ( 1371 ) , and occupied his lands in the southern part of kosovo and northern macedonia with the city of skopje . the turning point of vuk 's ascension to power in post-nemanjić serbia was his marriage with mara , daughter of the most powerful serbian magnate prince lazar hrebeljanović , which brought him substantial lands in kosovo and the city of zvečan as dowry . this marriage sealed the alliance between two houses and secured lazar 's assistance for vuk 's future plans , although vuk in return had to acknowledge lazar as his feudal senior . soon after the marriage , lazar , vuk and king tvrtko i of bosnia attacked župan nikola altomanović , who ruled in the western part of serbia , and conquered and divided his lands in 1373 . in the partition of altomanović 's land , vuk got areas of raška ( including the old serbian capital ras ) and lands in polimlje ( northern montenegro ) . after the death of đurađ i balšić ( 13 january 1378 ) , vuk captured his cities of prizren and peć and the area of metohija . at its peak , the realm of branković stretched from sjenica in the west to skopje in the east , with the cities of priština and vučitrn serving as its capitals . the most important cities in vuk 's province were priština , prizren , peć , skopje and ras , as well as the rich mining settlements of trepča , janjevo , gluhavica and others . battle of kosovo . thumb after the battle of maritza , ottomans forced the southern serbian feudal lords ( in present-day macedonia and greece ) , konstantin dragas , king marko , toma preljubović and others , to become their vassals , and started to attack the northern serbian lands ruled by prince lazar and vuk . after initial serbian successes at the battles of dubravnica ( 1381 ) , pločnik ( 1386 ) and bileća ( 1388 ) , the ottomans launched a full-scale attack on serbia aiming at the very heartland of vuk 's realm in central kosovo . in the epic battle of kosovo ( 1389 ) vuk participated along with his father-in-law lazar and a contingent of king tvrtko 's army . unlike lazar , who died in the battle along with most of his army , vuk managed to survive and preserve his army , which later gave material for a popular serbian folk tradition ( represented in folk epic poems and tales ) that he betrayed lazar in order to become supreme ruler of serbia , a theory that is rejected by modern day serbian historians , but not by the serb people . despite the consensus of modern historiography in serbia that vuk branković was not a traitor in the battle of kosovo in 1389 , momčilo spremić emphasized that there is a possibility that vuk really betrayed his serbian allies . . last years . after the battle of kosovo , vuk refused to become an ottoman vassal ( unlike prince stefan lazarević , son of prince lazar , who became an ottoman vassal in late 1389 ) , and started to plan anti-ottoman action together with the hungarian king sigismund . however , vuk was unable to resist the ottomans for long . in 1392 , they captured skopje and forced vuk to become their vassal and pay tribute . even after that vuk showed some resistance to ottomans , refusing to participate on the ottoman side in the battles of rovine ( 1395 ) and nicopolis ( 1396 ) , unlike other serbian lords such as prince stefan , prince marko and konstantin dejanović . he also maintained contacts with hungary . finally the ottomans ended this situation by attacking vuk in 1395-96 , seizing his land and giving most of it to prince stefan lazarević , while vuk himself was imprisoned and died in an ottoman prison . a small part of vuk 's land with the towns of priština and vučitrn were given to his sons to hold as ottoman vassals . . family . image : agiou pavlou monastery.jpg thumb 250px agiou pavlou monastery , restored by vuk branković he married mara ( marija ) , the daughter of lazar of serbia and milica nemanjić in 1371 . she died on april 12 , 1426 . they had three sons : grgur vuković ( 1377 - 13 march 1408 ) , đurađ branković ( 1377 - 24 december 1456 ) , succeeded his maternal uncle stefan lazarević as despot of serbia ( serbian despotate ) , ruling 1427–1456 lazar vuković ( died 12 july 1410 ) , knez . titles . he is most often titled '' lord vuk '' ( господин вук ) , while he signed himself '' lord of serbs and podunavlje '' ) . the serbian church had in the period between 1374 and 1379 accepted knez lazar as '' lord of serbs and podunavlje '' . according to historian r . mihaljčić , when vuk claimed the title , stefan lazarević was around 15 years old ( ca . 1392 ) . vuk was not recognised with that title , as it was preserved for lazar and lazar 's son stefan . . people of his court . thumb braiko pekpal ( fl . 1374 ) vlatko hranotić dragosav jakov nikola 1389 ) , kefalija nikolica 1389 ) , dijak pribil kućinić todor hamirović , vojvoda prnjak and čelnik smil ( fl . 1387 ) stefan ( fl . 1395 ) , chancellor . todor , son of žegar ( fl . 1387 ) . legacy . folk tradition portraits vuk as a traitor in the kosovo myth : supposedly , vuk tarnished the family name when he betrayed prince lazar at the battle of kosovo , which he survived in 1389 . this tradition may be apocryphal . . references . sources . . bibliography .