Radiosonde

history . the first flights of aerological instruments were done in the second half of the 19th century with kites and meteographs , a recording device measuring pressure and temperature that was recuperated after the experiment . this proved to be difficult because the kites were linked to the ground and were very difficult to manoeuvre in gusty conditions . furthermore , the sounding was limited to low altitudes because of the link to the ground . gustave hermite and georges besançon , from france , were the first in 1892 to use a balloon to fly the meteograph . in 1898 , léon teisserenc de bort organized at the observatoire de météorologie dynamique de trappes the first regular daily use of these balloons . data from these launches showed that the temperature lowered with height up to a certain altitude , which varied with the season , and then stabilized above this altitude . de bort 's discovery of the tropopause and stratosphere was announced in 1902 at the french academy of sciences . other researchers , like richard aßmann and william henry dines , were working at the same times with similar instruments . in 1924 , colonel william blaire in the u.s . signal corps did the first primitive experiments with weather measurements from balloon , making use of the temperature dependence of radio circuits . the first true radiosonde that sent precise encoded telemetry from weather sensors was invented in france by . bureau coined the name '' radiosonde '' and flew the first instrument on january 7 , 1929 . developed independently a year later , pavel molchanov flew a radiosonde on january 30 , 1930 . molchanov 's design became a popular standard because of its simplicity and because it converted sensor readings to morse code , making it easy to use without special equipment or training . dubois , multhauf and ziegler , '' the invention and development of the radiosonde '' , smithsonian studies in history and technology , no . 53 , 2002 . working with a modified molchanov sonde , sergey vernov was the first to use radiosondes to perform cosmic ray readings at high altitude . on april 1 , 1935 , he took measurements up to using a pair of geiger counters in an anti-coincidence circuit to avoid counting secondary ray showers . vernoff , s . '' radio-transmission of cosmic ray data from the stratosphere '' , nature , june 29 , 1935 . this became an important technique in the field , and vernov flew his radiosondes on land and sea over the next few years , measuring the radiation 's latitude dependence caused by the earth 's magnetic field . in 1936 , the u.s . navy assigned the u.s . bureau of standards to develop an official radiosonde for the navy to use . the nbs gave the project to harry diamond , who had previously worked on radio navigation and invented a blind landing system for airplanes . the organization led by diamond eventually ( in 1992 ) became a part of the u.s . army research laboratory . in 1937 , diamond , along with his associates francis dunmore and wilbur hinmann , jr . , created a radiosonde that employed audio-frequency subcarrier modulation with the help of a resistance-capacity relaxation oscillator . in addition , this nbs radiosonde was capable of measuring temperature and humidity at higher altitudes than conventional radiosondes at the time due to the use of electric sensors . in 1938 , diamond developed the first ground receiver for the radiosonde , which prompted the first service use of the nbs radiosondes in the navy . then in 1939 , diamond and his colleagues developed a ground-based radiosonde called the “ remote weather station , ” which allowed them to automatically collect weather data in remote and inhospitable locations . by 1940 , the nbs radiosonde system included a pressure drive , which measured temperature and humidity as functions of pressure . it also gathered data on cloud thickness and light intensity in the atmosphere . due to this and other improvements in cost ( about 25 ) , weight ( > 1 kilogram ) , and accuracy , hundreds of thousands of nbs-style radiosondes were produced nationwide for research purposes , and the apparatus was officially adopted by the u.s . weather bureau . diamond was given the washington academy of sciences engineering award in 1940 and the ire fellow award ( which was later renamed the harry diamond memorial award ) in 1943 for his contributions to radio-meteorology . the expansion of economically important government weather forecasting services during the 1930s and their increasing need for data motivated many nations to begin regular radiosonde observation programs in 1985 , as part of the soviet union 's vega program , the two venus probes , vega 1 and vega 2 , each dropped a radiosonde into the atmosphere of venus . the sondes were tracked for two days . although modern remote sensing by satellites , aircraft and ground sensors is an increasing source of atmospheric data , none of these systems can match the vertical resolution or less ) and altitude coverage of radiosonde observations , so they remain essential to modern meteorology . although hundreds of radiosondes are launched worldwide each day year-round , fatalities attributed to radiosondes are rare . the first known example was the electrocution of a lineman in the united states who was attempting to free a radiosonde from high-tension power lines in 1943 . '' linemen cautioned about disengaging radiosonde , '' electrical world , 15 may 1943 in 1970 an antonov 24 operating aeroflot flight 1661 suffered a loss of control after striking a radiosonde in flight resulting in the death of all 45 people on board . operation . a rubber or latex balloon filled with either helium or hydrogen lifts the device up through the atmosphere . the maximum altitude to which the balloon ascends is determined by the diameter and thickness of the balloon . balloon sizes can range from . as the balloon ascends through the atmosphere , the pressure decreases , causing the balloon to expand . eventually , the balloon will expand to the extent that its skin will break , terminating the ascent . an balloon will burst at about . dian j . gaffen . radiosonde observations and their use in sparc-related investigations . retrieved on 2008-05-25 . after bursting , a small parachute on the radiosonde 's support line carries it to earth . a typical radiosonde flight lasts 60 to 90 minutes . one radiosonde from clark air base , philippines , reached an altitude of . the modern radiosonde communicates via radio with a computer that stores all the variables in real time . the first radiosondes were observed from the ground with a theodolite , and gave only a wind estimation by the position . with the advent of radar by the signal corps it was possible to track a radar target carried by the balloons with the scr-658 radar . modern radiosondes can use a variety of mechanisms for determining wind speed and direction , such as a radio direction finder or gps . the weight of a radiosonde is typically . sometimes radiosondes are deployed by being dropped from an aircraft instead of being carried aloft by a balloon . radiosondes deployed in this way are called dropsondes . routine radiosonde launches . worldwide there are about 1,300 radiosonde launch sites . wmo global observing systemupper-air observations . retrieved february 19 , 2017 . most countries share data with the rest of the world through international agreements . nearly all routine radiosonde launches occur 45 minutes before the official observation time of 0000 utc and 1200 utc , so as to provide an instantaneous snapshot of the atmosphere . preflight procedures and success criteria , pdf this is especially important for numerical modeling . in the united states the national weather service is tasked with providing timely upper-air observations for use in weather forecasting , severe weather watches and warnings , and atmospheric research . the national weather service launches radiosondes from 92 stations in north america and the pacific islands twice daily . it also supports the operation of 10 radiosonde sites in the caribbean . a list of u.s . operated land based launch sites can be found in appendix c , u.s . land-based rawinsonde stations u.s . land-based rawinsode stations of the federal meteorological handbook 3 , titled rawinsonde and pibal observations , dated may 1997 . uses of upper air observations . raw upper air data is routinely processed by supercomputers running numerical models . forecasters often view the data in a graphical format , plotted on thermodynamic diagrams such as skew-t log-p diagrams , tephigrams , and or stüve diagrams , all useful for the interpretation of the atmosphere 's vertical thermodynamics profile of temperature and moisture as well as kinematics of vertical wind profile . radiosonde data is a crucially important component of numerical weather prediction . because a sonde may drift several hundred kilometers during the 90- to 120-minute flight , there may be concern that this could introduce problems into the model initialization . however , this appears not to be so except perhaps locally in jet stream regions in the stratosphere . dead link . radio regulations . according to article 1.109 of the international telecommunication union ( itu ) itu radio regulations ( rr ) : itu radio regulations , section iv . radio stations and systems – article 1.109 , definition : radiosonde