Davidson Black

early years . black was born in 1884 , in toronto , ontario , canada . when he was a child , he would spend many summers near or on the kawartha lakes . as a teenager , he would carry heavy loads of supplies for the hudson 's bay company . he also enjoyed collecting fossils along the banks of the don river . he also became friends with first nations people , and learned one first nations language . black also searched unsuccessfully for gold along the kawartha lakes . black showed an interest in biology at an early age , despite being born to a family association with law . davidson black biography world of scientific discovery biography at www.bookrags.com in 1906 , black gained a degree in medical science from the university of toronto . he continued in school studying comparative anatomy , and in 1909 became an anatomy instructor . in 1914 he spent half a year working under neuroanatomist grafton elliot smith , in manchester , england . smith was studying piltdown man during this time . this began an interest in human evolution . 1917 he joined the royal canadian army medical corps , where he treated injured returning canadian soldiers . later years . in 1919 after his discharge from the canadian army medical corps , he went to china to work at peking union medical college . starting as professor of neurology and embryology , he would be promoted to head of the anatomy department in 1924 . he planned to search for human fossils in 1926 , though the college encouraged him to concentrate on teaching . during this period johan gunnar andersson , who had done excavations near dragon bone hill ( zhoukoudian ) in 1921 , learned in sweden of black 's fossils examination . he gave black two human-similar molars to examine . the following year , with a grant from the rockefeller foundation , black began his search around zhoukoudian . during this time , though military unrest involving the national revolutionary army caused many western scientists left china , davidson black and his family stayed . black then launched a large scale investigation at the site . he was appointed primary coordinator . as such , he appointed both caucasian and chinese scientists . in summer 1926 , two molars were discovered by otto zdansky , who headed the excavations and who described them in 1927 ( bulletin of the geolocical survey , china ) as fossils of genus homo . black thought they belonged to a new human species and named them sinanthropus pekinensis . he carried this tooth in a small copper case lined with velvet attached to his belt . eyewitness account by his daughter nevitt later , he presented the tooth to the rockefeller foundation , which wanted more specimens before further grants would be given . during november 1928 , a lower jaw and several teeth and skull fragments were discovered . his find expanded the knowledge of human evolution . black presented this to the foundation , which granted him 80,000 . this grant continued the investigation and black established the cenozoic research laboratory with it . later another excavator found a skull . more specimens were found . black would frequently examine these late into the night . most of the original bones were lost in the process of shipping them out of china for safe-keeping during the beginning of world war ii . the japanese gained control of the peking union medical center during the war , where the laboratory containing all the fossils was ransacked and all the remaining specimens were confiscated . to this day , the fossils have not been found and no one is sure if they were stolen or legitimately lost . only the plaster imprints were left , one at the pumc , one at the smithsonian in washington , and one in london england . in 1931 black was awarded the daniel giraud elliot medal from the national academy of sciences . he died of heart failure in 1934 . g.e . smith , the neuroanatomist he worked under , wrote his obituary . welcome to . / bienvenue à . at collections.ic.gc.ca the extinct genus gigantopithecus blacki , first found in 1935 , was named in his honour . . personal life . he married his wife , adena nevitt , in 1913 , who accompanied him on his trips . they had two children together , a son , davidson ( b . 1921 ) , and a daughter , nevitt davidson ( b . 1925 ) . both were born in beijing . . asia hypothesis . paleotontologists who believed human origins were to be found in asia included johan gunnar andersson , otto zdansky and walter w . granger . all three of these scientists were known for visiting china and for their work and discoveries by excavating the sites at zhoukoudian that yielded the peking man ( homo erectus pekinensis ) . further funding for the excavations was carried out by davidson black , a key proponent of the asia hypothesis . because of the finds in zhoukoudian , such as peking man , the focus of paleoanthropological research moved entirely to asia , up until 1930 . handbook of paleoanthropology , volume 1 , winfriend henke , thorolf hardt , pp . 20-27 black wrote a paper in 1925 titled asia and the dispersal of primates which claimed that the origins of man were to be found in tibet , british india , the yung-ling and the tarim basin of china . his last paper , published in 1934 , argued for human origins in an eastern asian context . studying human origins , disciplinary history and epistemology , raymond corbey , wil roebroeks , p . 49 . quote . '' the peking man was a thinking being , standing erect , dating to the beginning of the ice age . '' davidson black quotes at en.thinkexist.com . publications . '' palæogeography and polar shift . a study of hypothetical projections . '' bulletin of the geological society of china , vol . x , peiping , 1931 . '' notice of the recovery of a second adult sinanthropus skull specimen . '' bulletin of the geological society of china , vol . ix , no . 2 , 1930 . '' interim report on the skull of sinanthropus . '' bulletin of the geological society of china , vol . ix , no . i , 1930 . '' preliminary notice of the discovery of an adult sinanthropus skull at chou kou tien . '' bulletin of the geological society of china , vol . viii , no . 3 , 1929 . '' preliminary note on additional sinanthropus material discovered in chou kou tien during 1923 . '' bulletin of the geological society of china , vol . viii , no . 1 , 1929 . '' the aeneolithic yang shao people of north china . '' reprinted from the transactions of the 6th congress of the far eastern association of tropical medicine . tokyo , japan , 1925 . '' asia and the dispersal of primates . '' reprinted from the bulletin of the geological society of china , vol . iv , no . 2 . , 1925 . '' a note of the physical characters of the prehistoric kansu race . '' from memoirs of the geological survey of china , series a , no . 5 , june , 1925 .