Ferdinand I of Naples

early life . ferdinand was born to king alfonso v of aragon and his mistress giraldona carlino . alfonso conquered the kingdom of naples in 1442 . in order to arrange a good future for ferdinand , king alfonso had him married in 1444 to isabella of clermont , who was the niece and heir presumptive of childless prince giovanni antonio del balzo orsini of taranto . she was a granddaughter of mary of enghien , who had been queen consort of naples between 1406 and 1414 . ferdinand 's wife stood to inherit remarkable feudal possessions in southern italy . reign . in accordance with his father 's will , ferdinand succeeded alfonso as king of naples in 1458 , when he was 35 years old . pope calixtus iii , however , declared the line of aragon extinct and the kingdom a fief of the church . calixtus died before he could make good his claim ( august 1458 ) , and the new pope pius ii within the year publicly recognized ferdinand 's titles . in 1459 , ferdinand 's rule was threatened by a long revolt of the barons . among the leaders of revolt were the prince of taranto , uncle of ferdinand 's wife . the rebels joined to offer the crown to john of anjou , a son of the former king rené . with the help of the genoese , john brought a fleet and landed , slowly taking some towns including nocera . on july 7 , 1460 , ferdinand was defeated by john in the plain beside the mouth of the sarno river south of mount vesuvius . ferdinand was nearly captured and escaped with a guard of only twenty men . the pope and the duke of milan sent reinforcements under the count of urbino federico da montefeltro and condottiero alessandro sforza , but these arrived after the defeat and battle of san fabriano by john 's ally piccinino at san fabriano . history of the city of rome in the middle ages , p . 186 . despite subsequently receiving the surrender of most of the strongholds in campania , john did not immediately march on naples and ferdinand and his wife isabella were able to hold it and slowly regain their position . isabella appears to have been responsible for dissuading orsini from supporting john and genoa removed its , assistance . the papacy , milan , and the albanian chief skanderbeg—who came to the aid of the prince whose father had aided him—provided forces which decisively defeated john 's land forces at troia on august 18 , 1462 . his fleet was finally demolished by the combined forces of ferdinand and king juan ii of aragon off ischia in july 1465 . modern europe , by thomas henry dyer , page 103-105 . by 1464 , ferdinand had re-established his authority in the kingdom , although some antipathy from the barons remained . in 1478 he allied himself with pope sixtus iv against lorenzo de medici , but the latter journeyed alone to naples , where he succeeded in negotiating an honorable peace with ferdinand . the original intent of making taranto as his and his heirs ' main principality was no longer current , but still it was a strengthening of ferdinand 's resources and position that in 1463 his wife inherited from her uncle the rich principality of taranto , county of lecce and other fiefs in apulia . isabella died in 1465 , and by 1476 , ferdinand had married joanna of aragon , his first cousin . in 1480 , forces of the ottoman empire under orders of mehmed ii captured otranto , and massacred the majority of the inhabitants , but in the following year it was retaken by ferdinand 's son alphonso , duke of calabria . in 1482 , abandoning his traditional position of paladin of the papal states , he fought alongside ferrara and milan against the alliance of sixtus iv and the republic of venice ( see war of ferrara ) . ferdinand 's oppressive government led in 1485 to a reinvigorated rebellion of the aristocracy , known as the conspiracy of the barons , which included francesco coppola and antonello sanseverino of salerno and supported by pope innocent viii . coppola and antonello petrucci were arrested during a wedding at castel nuovo , and subsequently executed . ultimately this uprising was crushed , and many of the nobles , notwithstanding ferdinand 's signing of a general amnesty , were afterwards jailed and executed at his command . in december 1491 ferdinand was visited by a group of pilgrims on their return from the holy land . this group was led by william i , landgrave of hesse . encouraged by ludovico sforza of milan , in 1493 king charles viii of france was preparing to invade italy for the conquest of naples and starting the italian wars , and ferdinand realized that this was a greater danger than any he had yet faced . with almost prophetic instinct he warned the italian princes of the calamities in store for them , but his negotiations with pope alexander vi and ludovico sforza failed . ferdinand died on 25 january 1494 , worn out with anxiety ; he was succeeded by his son , alphonso ii of naples , who was soon deposed by the invasion of king charles which his father had so feared . the cause of his death was determined in 2006 to have been colorectal cancer ( mucinous adenocarcinoma type with mutation in the kras gene ) , by examination of his mummy . his remains show levels of carbon 13 and nitrogen 15 consistent with historical reports of considerable consumption of meat . ottini l , falchetti m , marinozzi s , angeletti lr , fornaciari g ( 2010 ) gene-environment interactions in the pre-industrial era : the cancer of king ferrante i of aragon ( 1431-1494 ) . hum . pathol . . ferdinand 's reputation . according to the encyclopædia britannica eleventh edition , '' ferdinand was gifted with great courage and real political ability , but his method of government was vicious and disastrous . his financial administration was based on oppressive and dishonest monopoly , and he was mercilessly severe and utterly treacherous towards his enemies . '' ferdinand had many enemies , especially considering his kingdom 's importance to other rulers , and he was ruthless in response to any perceived slight . he even fiercely plotted against pope alexander vi , after he realized that the pontiff could not secure his position . br . j.b . darcy , cfc , what you do n't know about the borgia pope : alexander vi ( 1492-1503 ) ( catholic insight ) . quote : '' guiliano immediately began to plot with king ferrante of naples against the pope . i have mentioned already that ferrante refused to acknowledge that he held his kingdom as a fief of the papacy . whether he was as evil a man as history has depicted him is hard to say , but he was certainly an ambitious , treacherous person . determined to extend his rule to parts of the papal states , he was blocked at every turn by alexander . to obtain the pope 's approval for his plans , he offered his granddaughter in marriage to jofre , the pope 's grandnephew but was refused . finally , he decided that , to make any progress , he had to get rid of his nemesis . for this purpose , to convince the rulers to depose the pope , he began to write a series of letters to his relatives , the sovereigns of europe , accusing alexander of all sorts of evil conduct , particularly of obtaining the papacy by simony . '' as further testimony to the latter , jacob burckhardt described his recreational activities as follows : '' besides hunting , which he practiced regardless of all rights of property , his pleasures were of two kinds : he liked to have his opponents near him , either alive in well-guarded prisons , or dead and embalmed , dressed in the costume which they wore in their lifetime . '' jacob burkhardt , the civilization of the renaissance in italy , 1.5 - the greater dynasties fearing no one , he would take great pleasure in conducting his guests on a tour of his prized '' museum of mummies '' . marriages and children . ferdinand married twice . first to isabella of clermont in 1444 . isabel was daughter of tristan de clermont , count di copertino and caterina orsini . she died in 1465 . they had six children : alfonso ii of naples ( 4 november 1448 – 18 december 1495 ) . eleanor of naples ( 22 june 1450 – 11 october 1493 ) . she was consort to ercole i d'este , duke of ferrara and mother to isabella d'este and beatrice d'este . frederick i of naples ( 19 april 1452 – 9 november 1504 ) . john of naples ( 25 june 1456 – 17 october 1485 ) . later archbishop of taranto , then cardinal , and archbishop of esztergom ( 1480–1485 ) until his death . beatrice of naples ( 14 september/16 november 1457 – 23 september 1508 ) . she was queen consort to matthias corvinus of hungary and later to vladislaus ii of bohemia and hungary . francis of naples , duke of sant angelo ( 16 december 1461 – 26 october 1486 ) . second to joanna of aragon ( 1454 – 9 january 1517 ) . she was born to john ii of aragon and juana enríquez , his second wife . she was a full sister of king ferdinand ii of aragon ( died 1516 ) and a half sister of the unfortunate prince charles of viana ( 1421–1461 ) , john ii 's son by his first marriage . joanna and ferdinand i were married on 14 september 1476 . they had two children : joanna of naples ( 1478 –married 1496 - 27 august 1518 ) . queen consort to ferdinand ii of naples ( 1469–1496 ) , who , as the son of ferdinand i 's son alfonso ii of naples ( 1458 - king 1494 - 1495 in messina ) , was also her half-nephew . no issue . charles of naples ( 1480–1486 ) . ferdinand also had a number of illegitimate children : by his concubine diana guardato , a member of the aristocratic patriacian family of the kingdom of naples : ferdinando d ' aragona y guardato , 1st duke of montalto , who married 1st , anna sanseverino , 2nd , castellana de cardona . maria d'aragona , who married antonio todeschini piccolomini , duke of amalfi , a nephew of pope pius ii and brother of pope pius iii . giovanna d ' aragona , who married leonardo della rovere , duke of arce and sora , a nephew of pope sixtus iv and brother of pope julius ii . by his concubine eulalia ravignano : maria d'aragona , who married gian giordano orsini . by his concubine giovanna caracciolo : ferdinand d'aragona , count of arsena . enrico d'aragona , marquess of gerace . cesare d'aragona , marquess of santa agata . leonor d'aragona . alonso d'aragona ( 1460–1510 ) , designated heir to queen charlotte of cyprus , who was either married or engaged to charla of lusignan ( 1468 – in prison in padua , 1480 ) , a natural daughter of charlotte 's half brother , king james ii of cyprus . his young bride was captured by the queen 's opponents and died in captivity shortly before her twelfth birthday . hill , george : a history of cyprus , cambridge university press , cambridge , england , 1948 . after her death , a marriage was proposed between him and catherine conaro , but the plan came to nothing due to the interference of the republic of venice . instead , charlotte ceded her claims to the cypriotic throne to her cousin , charles i of savoy , in 1485 . alonso was made bishop of chieti on 28 february 1488 and kept this office until 16 november 1496 . lucrezia d'aragona , daughter of either giovanna caracciola or eulalia ravignano , was consort to onorato iii , prince of altamura . references . sources . . external links .