Telegraph key

types . since its original inception , the telegraph key 's design has developed such that there are now multiple types of keys . straight keys . a straight key is the common telegraph key as seen in various movies . it is a simple bar with a knob on top and a switch underneath . when the bar is pressed down against spring tension , it makes a closed electric circuit . traditionally , american telegraph keys had flat topped knobs and narrow bars ( frequently curved ) , while british telegraph keys had ball shaped knobs and thick bars . this appears to be purely a matter of culture and training , but the users of each are tremendously partisan . straight keys have been made in numerous variations for over 150 & nbsp ; years and in numerous countries . they are the subject of an avid community of key collectors . the straight keys used in wire telegraphy also had a shorting bar that closed the electrical circuit when the operator was not actively sending messages . this was to complete the electrical path to the next station so that its sounder would operate , as in the operator receiving a message from the next town . although occasionally included in later keys for reasons of tradition , the shorting bar is unnecessary for radio telegraphy , except as a convenience when tuning the transmitter . the straight key is simple and reliable , but the rapid pumping action needed to send a string of dots ( or dits as most operators call them ) poses some significant drawbacks . transmission speeds vary from 5 & nbsp ; words ( 25 & nbsp ; characters ) per minute , by novice operators , up to about 30 & nbsp ; words ( 150 & nbsp ; characters ) per minute by skilled operators . in the early days of telegraphy , a number of professional telegraphers developed a repetitive stress injury known as glass arm or telegrapher 's paralysis . '' glass arm '' or '' telegrapher 's paralysis '' may be reduced or eliminated by increasing the side play of the straight key by loosening the adjustable trunnion screws . such problems can be avoided by using a good technique . . . . . alternative designs . in addition to the basic up-and-down telegraph key , telegraphers have been experimenting with alternate key designs from the beginning of telegraphy . some are made to move side-to-side instead of up-and-down . some of the designs , such as sideswipers and semi-automatic keys operate mechanically . from the mid-20th century electronic devices called '' keyers '' have been developed , operated by special keys of various designs generally categorized as single-paddle keys and '' iambic '' or double-paddle keys . ; sideswipers the first widely accepted alternative key was the sideswiper or sidewinder , sometimes called a cootie key or bushwhacker . this key uses a side-to-side action with contacts in both directions and the arm spring-loaded to return to center . a series of dits could be sent by rocking the arm back and forth . the alternating action produces a distinctive rhythm or swing which noticeably affects the operator 's transmission style ( known as his ‘ fist ’ ) . although the original sideswiper is now rarely seen or used , nearly all advanced keys use some form of side-to-side action . ; semi-automatic key thumb a popular side-to-side key is the semi-automatic key or bug , sometimes known as a vibroplex key , after the company that first manufactured them . the original bugs were fully mechanical , based on a kind of simple clockwork mechanism , and required no electronic keyer . when the paddle is pressed to the left it makes a continuous contact suitable for sending dashes ( or dahs , as most operators call them ) . when the paddle is pressed to the right , it kicks a horizontal pendulum which then rocks against the contact points , sending a series of short pulses ( dits ) at a speed which is controlled by the position of the pendulum ’ s weight . a skilled operator can achieve sending speeds in excess of 40 & nbsp ; words per minute with a ‘ bug ’ . ; electronic keyers and paddle keys like semi-automatic keys , the telegrapher operates an electronic keyer paddle by swinging the lever from side-to-side . when pressed to one side , the keyer electronics generate a series of '' dahs '' ; when pressed to the other side , a series of '' dits . '' keyers work with two different types of keys : single paddle and double paddle keys . like semi-automatic keys , pressing the paddle on one side produces a dit and the other a dah . single paddle keys are also called single lever keys or sideswipers , the same name as the older side-to-side key design they greatly resemble . double paddle keys are also called '' iambic '' keys or '' squeeze '' keys . single paddle keys are essentially the same as sideswiper keys with separate contacts on the left and right . double-paddle keys have two arms , one for each contact , both arms held away from the common center by a spring ; pressing either of the paddles towards the center makes contact , the same as pressing a single-lever key to one side . for double-paddle keys , squeezing both paddles together makes a double-contact , which causes the keyer to send alternating dits and dahs . most electronic keyers include dot and / or dash memory functions , so the operator do not need to use perfect spacing between dits and dahs or vice versa . with dit or dah memory , the operator 's keying action can be about one dit ahead of the actual transmission . the electronic keyer adjusts the timing so that the output of each letter is machine-perfect . electronic keyers allow very high speed transmission of code . thumb using a keyer in what 's called '' iambic '' mode requires a key with two paddles : one paddle produces dits and the other produces dahs . pressing both at the same time produces an alternating dit-dah-dit-dah sequence , which starts with either a dit or dah depending on which side was pressed first . an additional advantage of electronic keyers over semiautomatic keys is that code speed is easily changed with electronic keyers , just by turning a knob . with a semiautomatic key , the location of the pendulum weight and the pendulum spring tension and contact must be re-balanced to change the dit speed . . dual-lever paddles . keys having two separate levers , one for dits and the other for dahs are called dual or dual-lever paddles . with a dual paddle both contacts may be closed simultaneously , enabling the '' iambic '' functions of an electronic keyer that is designed to support them . the operator can create a series of alternating dits and dahs ( similar to a sequence of iamb ( poetry ) ) by squeezing the levers together . arduino cw keyer , k3ng . . for that reason , dual paddles are sometimes called squeeze keys . whether the sequence begins with a dit or a dah is dependent on which lever is closed first . if the dah lever is closed first , then the first element will be a dah , so the string of elements will be similar to a sequence of trochees in poetry and the method could as logically be called '' trochaic keying '' . insofar as iambic keying is a function of the electronic keyer , it is technically incorrect to refer to a dual paddle as an '' iambic '' paddle , although this has often been done for marketing purposes . a dual paddle is required for iambic sending with an iambic keyer , but it can be used without squeezing and there are electronic keyers which do not offer iambic functions . a single-paddle also utilizes separate contacts for dits and dahs , but there is no ability to make both contacts simultaneously by squeezing the paddles together ( iambic ) . when a single-paddle key is used with an electronic keyer , continuous dits are created by holding the dit side . likewise , continuous dahs are created by holding the dah contact . iambic keying or squeeze keying creates alternating dits and dahs . this reduces the keystrokes or hand movements necessary to make some characters , e.g . the letter c , which can be sent by merely squeezing the two paddles together . with a single-paddle or non-iambic keyer , the hand motion would require alternating four times for c ( dah-dit-dah-dit ) . iambic keyers function in one of at least two major modes : mode & nbsp ; a and mode & nbsp ; b . mode & nbsp ; a is the original iambic mode , in which alternate dots and dashes are produced as long as both paddles are depressed . when the paddles are released , the keying stops with the last dot or dash that was sent while the paddles were depressed . mode & nbsp ; b is the second mode , which devolved from a logic error in an early iambic keyer . over the years iambic mode & nbsp ; b has become something of a standard and is the default setting in most keyers . in mode & nbsp ; b , dots and dashes are produced as long as both paddles are depressed . when the paddles are released , the keying continues by sending one more element , i.e . , a dot if the paddles were released during a dash , or a dash if the paddles were released during a dot . users accustomed to one mode may find it difficult to adapt to the other , so most modern keyers allow selection of the desired keyer mode . a third electronic keyer mode useful with a dual paddle is the '' ultimatic '' mode , named for the electronic keyer that introduced it . in the ultimatic keying mode , the keyer will switch to the opposite element if the second lever is pressed before the first is released ( that is , squeezed ) . typically , single and dual-paddle keys use horizontal movements , while a straight-key utilizes an up-and-down movement . the efficiency of iambic keying has recently been discussed in terms of movements per character and timings for high speed cw . iambic keying – debunking the myth , marshall g . emm , n1fn . . non-telegraphy uses . simple telegraph-like keys were long used to control the flow of electricity in laboratory tests of electrical circuits . often , these were simple '' strap '' keys , in which a bend in the key lever provided the key 's spring action . telegraph keys were once used in the study of operant conditioning with pigeons . starting in the 1940s , initiated by b . f . skinner at harvard university , the keys were mounted vertically behind a small circular hole about the height of a pigeon 's beak in the front wall of an operant conditioning chamber . electromechanical recording equipment detected the closing of the switch whenever the pigeon pecked the key . depending on the psychological questions being investigated , keypecks might have resulted in the presentation of food or other stimuli . modern pigeon response keys are specially made switches but are still called '' keys '' due to their origins as telegraph keys . '' fist '' . with straight keys , side-swipers , and , to an extent , bugs , each and every telegraphist has their own unique style and pattern when transmitting a message . an operator 's style is known as their '' fist '' . to other telegraphers , every fist is unique and can be used to identify the telegrapher transmitting a particular message . this had a huge significance in the world wars , as it could be used to track the location of individual ships and submarines and for traffic analysis . however , electronic keyers ( single-paddle or iambic ) will produce '' perfect '' code at a set speed , thus only inter-character and inter-word spacing can produce a semblance of a fist .