Reigate and Banstead

history of local authority and politics . the district was formed on 1 april 1974 , under the local government act 1972 , by a merger of the municipal borough of reigate with banstead urban district and part of dorking and horley rural district . there are two civil parishes towards the south the borough : salfords and sidlow and horley . the remainder of the area has two rather than three tiers of local government ; the next tier up is surrey county council . local politics . the 2019 election saw the conservatives hold control of the council , with a significantly reduced majority . administration ( 29 ) : conservatives – 29 seats opposition ( 16 ) : green party – 6 seats liberal democrats – 3 seats tattenham corner and preston residents association – 3 seats nork residents association – 2 seats independent – 1 seat reigate residents association – 1 seat . coat of arms . the coat of arms is a combination of the elements of the reigate shield , the device of banstead and symbols of the parishes of horley and salfords and sidlow . the shield has a background of blue and yellow chequers taken from the arms of the de warenne family . william de warenne accompanied william the conqueror from normandy and was the first earl of surrey and the builder of reigate castle . against this pattern is the reigate castle gate and oak tree . the top of the shield has a black background as in the original reigate arms but on which is a gold woolpack between two sprigs of oak . the woolpack or woolsack refers to the former importance of sheep rearing and wool production in banstead . the oak sprigs represent the two parishes of horley and salfords and sidlow . above the shield is a helmet with a wreath and draped cloth also in the blue and gold of the de warennes . on top of the helmet is a pilgrim referring to the ancient route along the escarpment of the north downs by banstead and reigate , the pilgrims way . on either side of the shield is a white lion and a white horse . the lion comes from the arms of the de mowbray family who were briefly lords of the manor of banstead in the 12th century . the horse refers to the tradition of horse racing on banstead downs in the 17th century and immortalised in the oaks race of epsom derby friday . on the necks of the animals are wreaths again in the blue and yellow . on the shoulders are roundels of blue and white waves indicating the river mole in horley and sidlow . the roundel on the lion has a tanner ’ s ( or flaying ) knife , the emblem of st bartholomew , the patron of horley , who is said to have been flayed or skinned before he was crucified . the roundel on the shoulder of the horse has a willow leaf , a reference to salfords , which is derived from sallow ford . the sallow tree is commonly known as pussy willow . the motto '' never wonne ne never shall '' is taken from an ancient couplet and refers to the defeat of the danes by king alfred in a battle in the vale of holmesdale in the 9th century , now remembered in the name battlebridge . reigate castle has also been known as holmesdale castle . a translation is '' never conquered nor never shall '' . . settlements within the borough . : grouped by conurbation clockwise from the north : banstead , burgh heath and nork kingswood including lower kingswood chipstead and woodmansterne hooley and netherne-on-the-hill redhill , earlswood , meadvale and merstham whitebushes and salfords horley sidlow reigate , gatton , south park , reigate ( hamlets ) and woodhatch walton-on-the-hill and mogador/margery ( hamlets ) tadworth , tattenham corner epsom the developed part of epsom downs is not in epsom and ewell and is near epsom downs railway station . elevations , landscape and wildlife . the northern third of the borough is on the north downs or its upper slopes . commanding viewpoints exist in several locations in this area with the southern aspects of colley hill and reigate noteworthy enough to have had a major memorial and a picnic area with large café respectively . historically much of this third was named walton heath and banstead heath . for tourists , box hill on the southern ridge with its visitor centre and greater than 180 degree viewpoint over the river mole attracts higher numbers less than west along the pilgrims ' way in mole valley . the softer greensand ridge which is parallel to the south breaks up in the middle of the borough , forming the redhill basin and various mounds around reigate before continuing in both directions at higher elevations , see the greensand way . the mole forms a section of the western border of the borough down to wonham mill at the western extreme of flanchford in the reigate post town , itself at a millpond at the foot of the wooded snag brook a tributary which rises near the a25 road . most of the county is metropolitan green belt . there are significant areas of forest and heath management , including five reserves within the national wildlife trust scheme : see surrey wildlife trust . economy . the economy is diverse , with a strong local service sector , city workers as most locations are easily within the london commuter belt , trades , a developed public/education sector and several farms concentrated towards crop agriculture . there is an extent of woodland forestry . several employers with an international renown are found in force in and around the two most commercial towns centres of reigate and redhill : including towers watson , kimberly clark , legal & general , travelers group ( insurance ) , axa insurance breakdown , black & veatch and esure . pfizer uk headquarters is by the m25 motorway in walton-on-the-hill . notably sutton and east surrey water is headquartered in redhill and sgn in horley . a choice of hotels exists in and around horley including its adjacent neighbourhood , sometimes named independently by businesses and residents , hookwood , on the east and north outskirts of gatwick airport respectively . historic airline companies based in the borough . in the late 20th century the airline dan-air had its head office in the newman house in horley , '' world airline directory . '' flight international . 25–31 march 1992 75 . and air europe had its head office in reigate . '' world airline directory . '' flight international . 26 july 1980 . 274 . '' head office : europe house , bancroft road , reigate , surrey , great britain . '' . transport . roads . the m25 motorway passes from the middle of the east of the borough to just south of the tripoint with epsom and ewell and mole valley and has two junctions , one for the m23 motorway that passes through the eastern side of the borough north-south and starts in the northeast of the borough , the other at reigate hill . the a23 road from london splits into the ongoing a23 from the south and the m23 at hooley . the a217 road is a second london road starting in reigate via banstead and sutton and on to london . two traditional , mostly up to county distance alternatives etymology of the north-south/east-west motorway : the low a25 between godstone/guildford and the a23 , the latter being used for the london to brighton events . rail . the main train operator in the borough is southern , with other services being operated by thameslink and great western railway . through routes are the north downs line and the more heavily used london to brighton line that has several operators plus several branch service routes operating to london ( the destination in the borough of one such service is reigate ) . although these are the main railways for long and short distance travel , two branch lines cut through lower parts of the north downs plateau in the north ( to tattenham corner via kingswood and to epsom downs via banstead , all four stations being in the borough ) . twinning . the borough is twinned with : brunoy in essonne , île-de-france , france eschweiler in north rhine-westphalia , germany . see also . list of places of worship in reigate and banstead reigate town hall . notes and references . notes . references . external links . reigate and banstead borough council the reigate web