Shivta

history . left long considered a classical nabataean town on the ancient spice route , archaeologists are now considering the possibility that shivta was a byzantine agricultural colony and a way station for pilgrims en route to the saint catherine 's monastery in the sinai peninsula . a few roman-period ruins have been discovered , but most of the archaeological findings date to the byzantine period . shivta 's water supply was based on surface runoff collected in large reservoirs . meet shivta national park , at the new homepage of the nature and parks authority , accessed 5 august 2020 . roman period . roman ruins from the first century bce have been unearthed in the southern part of the town . . byzantine period . three byzantine churches ( a main church and two smaller churches ) , two wine-presses , residential areas and administrative buildings have been excavated . the wine presses at shivta give an insight into the scale of wine production at the time . according to the calculations of archaeologists , the nabatean/byzantine village of shivta produced about two million liters of wine . '' no sour grapes '' , deborah rubin fields for the jerusalem post , 17 february 2011 , partially accessed 5 august 2020 adjacent to the site is a large farm that uses nabatean agricultural techniques of irrigation , sowing and reaping . in the early 6th century , grape production in the negev for the so-called vinum gazentum ( 'gaza wine ' in latin ) experiences a major boom , due to the high demand for this product throughout europe and the middle east . this has been documented by studying ancient trash mounds at shivta , elusa and nessana , which showed a sharp peak in the presence of grape pips and broken '' gaza jars '' ( a type of amphorae used in this period to export levantine goods from the port of gaza ) , following a slower rise during the fourth and fifth centuries . however , mid-century two major calamities strike the byzantine empire and large parts of the world : a short period of climate change known as the late antique little ice age ( 536-545 ) , caused by huge volcanic eruptions in faraway places , which lead to extreme weather events ; and in the 540s the first outbreak of bubonic plague in the old world , known as the justinianic plague . probably as a result of these two events , international trade with luxury goods such as gaza wine almost grounded to a halt , and in shivta and other negev settlements grape production again gave way to subsistence farming , focused on barley and wheat . the previously widely accepted theory that the muslim conquest , which came a century later , and the muslim ban on alcoholic beverages were the cause for the decline of the wine industry in the negev has been now proven wrong . in nearby nessana , the number of grape pips is even on the rise again during the early islamic period , probably due to the needs of a local christian monastery . this seems to indicate that the wine industry of the negev could well be sustained over centuries through appropriate agricultural techniques and in spite of the arid climate , but that the grape monoculture was economically unsustainable in the long run . . early muslim period . after the arab conquest in the 7th century ce , the population dwindled . shivta was finally abandoned in the 8th or 9th century ce . excavation history . ulrich jasper seetzen was the first westerner to visit the site when he arrived in 1805 , but he misidentified it as abde ( avdat ) . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 1 edward henry palmer came in 1870 and the following year he published the first official description , röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 2 while alois musil 's 1901 visit resulted in the publication of the first photos of the ruins . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 4 a team from the école biblique in jerusalem including famed researchers antonin jaussen , raphaël savignac and louis-hugues vincent studied a few aspects of the site in 1904 , theodor kühtreiber added a few observations in 1912 . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 5 the first scientific study covering agricultural and social aspects came as a result of a survey by c . l . woolley and t . e . lawrence ( the future '' lawrence of arabia '' ) , taken on behalf of the palestine exploration fund ( pef ) in 1914 . röhl ( 2010 ) , pp . 6ff . during the great war , a german team of researchers ( theodor wiegand , carl watzinger and walter bachmann ) , part of the ( '' german-turkish command for cultural heritage protection '' ) , studied the site in 1916 . röhl ( 2010 ) , pp . 11ff . the école biblique returned in 1926 with a team under raphaël tonneau , and in 1929 with alexis mallon . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 14 in 1933–38 , american archaeologist harris dunscombe colt ( from the family of revolver inventor , samuel colt ) conducted a dig at shivta . the house he lived in bears an inscription in ancient greek that reads : “ with good luck . colt built ( this house ) with his own money . '' röhl ( 2010 ) , pp . 14-15 colt never published the result of his excavations , altogether undertaken in a scientifically less than laudable manner , which also represent the only large-scale archaeological campaigns executed at the site . röhl ( 2010 ) , pp . 14-15 much of the archaeological information is lost for good , not least due to a dubious fire at the expedition house that consumed all the collected architectural decoration and dig notes . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 15 updates from 2018 : : in january 1938 , a suitcase , which contained artifacts , documents , and photographs from the archaeological excavations at shivta , was forgotten at the haifa port . the suitcase belonged to harris dunscombe colt ( 1901—1973 ) , the excavator of shivta . colt never came to claim the forgotten suitcase , nor was it ever sent to him . the suitcase was eventually shipped to jerusalem and its contents were never studied or published . : the artifacts , which consist of small items like jewelry , door hinges , nails , pieces of glass , objects made from bone , ivory and wood , and shards of pottery inscribed with arabic and greek writing , are now on display at the hecht museum at the university of haifa . in the late 1940s , bellarmino bagatti continued work at the northern church , röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 15 and in the 1950s nelson glueck researched shivta 's ecology . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 16 between 1958-1960 , michael avi-yonah and made the site accessible , in the process also clearing the central church of debris . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 16 in the 1960s , botanist michael evenari studied the economy of shivta and water collection in its arid environment , his methods of experimental archaeology offering important insights into subsistence farming in the negev desert . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 16 between 1970-1976 , avraham negev led various surveys , röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 16 others following with a number of small digs , theoretical studies and mapping efforts . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 17 a 2000-2001 in-depth study of shivta 's water systems , based on surveys and analysis , was the work of tsvika tsuk . röhl ( 2010 ) , p . 18 . see also . archaeology of israel tourism in israel . references . bibliography . nash , g.h . , 2019 . one of the magnificent six : secrets for the byzantine city of shivta . current world archaeology 96 , 46-49 . . external links . 360 degrees panorama of shivtah incense route - desert cities in the negev , unesco i due battisteri di shivta su beweb - beni ecclesiastici in web