Tourism in Denmark

copenhagen and sealand . the capital . in 2004 copenhagen region had 136 hotels with a total of 4.9 million nights spent . there were 250 cruise liners calling at copenhagen port with more than 350,000 passengers . among the major tourist attractions are tivoli gardens , the freetown christiania and the little mermaid statue , all located in copenhagen . a survey conducted by the newspaper berlingske tidende in july 2008 listed the little mermaid as the most popular tourist attraction in copenhagen . storybyturister vil være trendy , berlinske lørdag , 19 july 2008 , p.6 . . surrounding area . image : roskilde festival - orange stage - bruce springsteen.jpg 250px thumb roskilde festival kronborg in helsingør is famous for its associations with shakespeare 's hamlet . the louisiana museum of modern art 30 & nbsp ; km north of copenhagen is the most visited museum in denmark , and roskilde festival near roskilde 30 & nbsp ; km west of copenhagen attracts over 100,000 guests every year . southern sealand , lolland , falster and møn . in view of its proximity to germany , one of the most popular areas of denmark for visitors is the south of sealand and the neighbouring islands . møn , with its magnificent møns klint , liselund and its sandy beaches is one of the main destinations . falster has a number of sandy beaches including those at marielyst . the area also has several tourist attractions including knuthenborg safari park and middelaldercentret both on lolland , bonbon-land near næstved and the geocenter at møns klint . bornholm . the island of bornholm in the baltic sea to the south of sweden has a number of tourist attractions , including rocky seascapes , sandy beaches and fishing villages . among these towns are gudhjem , sandvig , svaneke and rønne . the ruin of europe 's largest castle , hammershus , is the island 's most famous monument . there are ferry services to bornholm from køge near copenhagen , from ystad in the south of sweden , from rügen in the north east of germany and from kołobrzeg and świnoujście in the north west of poland . there is also an bornholm airport . funen . funen , linked to sealand by the great belt bridge , has strong associations with hans christian andersen who was born in odense . the small coastal towns of fåborg and svendborg are popular with tourists both as attractions in their own right and as centres for visiting the surroundings , particularly the castles of egeskov and hvedholm and the unspoiled islands of thurø , tåsinge and ærø with their narrow streets and thatched cottages . jutland . major cities . the cities of aalborg , in the north , and aarhus , in the east , attract a considerable number of visitors , whether for business or pleasure . aalborg 's 14th century budolfi church , 17th century aalborghus castle and the jomfru ane gade ( a lively old street close to the city centre ) are major attractions . aarhus is amongst the top 100 conference cities of the world and has seen a large expansion of the hotel business , throughout the last couple of decades . the city is home to several of denmarks ' top tourist attractions , including the museum village of den gamle by ( the old town ) , aros art museum , moesgård museum and tivoli friheden accounting for more than 1.4 million visitors annually . other important tourist attractions are music festivals and shopping facilities . with one of the largest ports in northern europe , more than a dozen international cruise ships docks in aarhus each year . regional attractions . among jutland 's regional attractions are legoland close to billund airport , the easterly village of ebeltoft with its cobbled streets and half-timbered houses , skagen in the far north known for its seascapes and artist community and the north-west beach resorts of løkken and lønstrup . the island of mors , also known for its natural environment , attracts tourists to its jesperhus and to the cliff at hanklit which overlooks the sea . jelling , near vejle in the south-eastern part of jutland , is a world heritage site , famous for its two great tumulus mounds erected in the late 10th century and its runic stones erected by king harold . near esbjerg on the west coast stands svend wiig hansen 's enormous sculpture of four chalky white figures gazing out at the sea . known as mennesket ved havet or men at the sea and standing 79 m high , it can be seen for miles around . cuisine . the new danish cuisine - part of the new nordic cuisine movement - has gathered international attention in the new millennium as an inspiring , high quality gourmet cuisine with several acclaimed restaurants . the most popular restaurants of this particular cuisine is primarily located in the copenhagen area such as noma , geranium , restaurant aoc , den røde cottage and many others . important provincial restaurants serving a new danish cuisine , includes ti trin ned in fredericia and ruths gourmet in skagen . apart from the new danish cuisine , denmark has an increasing number of high quality gourmet restaurants serving an international cuisine that has also attracted international attention . many restaurants in the copenhagen area has been awarded michelin guide and in 2015 , restaurants in aarhus were the first provincial spots to receive this highly acclaimed rating . many other restaurants throughout the country figures in other important food guides , including the nordic white guide . the usual everyday fare of traditional danish food for the citizens , comprise a lunch of smørrebrød on thinly sliced rugbrød . on occasion , the sandwiches are richly garnished with onion rings , radish slices , cucumbers , tomato slices , parsley , remoulade or mayonnaise among others . for elaborate lunch meals , it is custom that it starts with seafood , usually fish such as herring , smoked mackerel or eel , shrimp , or breaded plaice filets with remoulade , after which it moves on with meat such as slices of roast pork or beef , frikadeller ( meat balls ) , hams and liver pâté . danish culture from portlanddanes.org . retrieved 13 march 2009 . the meal is often accompanied by beer , on occasion also shots of ice-cold snaps or akvavit . in the evening , hot meals are usually served . traditional dishes include battered and fried fish , roast pork with red cabbage , pot-roast chicken , and pork chops . game is sometimes served in the autumn . steaks are increasingly popular . transport . air . copenhagen airport is the largest airport in scandinavia . the airport is located at kastrup , 8 & nbsp ; km from central copenhagen . it is connected by train to copenhagen central station and beyond as well as to malmö and other towns in sweden . for the west of the country , the major airport is billund although both aarhus , aalborg , and karup have smaller airports with regular connections to copenhagen . rail . denmark has a good national railway network . there are also frequent train services to malmö and other parts of sweden . germany is connected both by rail services using the ferries from puttgarden to rødby and by services across the flensburg-padborg land border in the south of jutland . road . motorways are well developed across the country , the only tolls being on the major bridges ( over the great belt and to malmö ) . bicycles . outside of the towns and cities there are often bicycle tracks parallel to , but separated from , the roads between towns . during the summer months , there are free '' city bikes '' stationed at various spots in the downtown area of copenhagen and aarhus . the idea is that anyone can take a bike from one of the spots , ride it to another spot and leave it there for the next person . there are numerous national and regional bicycle routes throughout denmark . they are all marked and include rest areas with benches and other necessities . sea . international overnight ferry services connect oslo , norway , to copenhagen every day . harwich , south-east england , used to be connected to esbjerg , west jutland three times a week . routes and timetable , dfds seaways . retrieved 19 march 2009 . the esbjerg & ndash ; harwich connection was closed in 2014 , after nearly 140 years of operation . there are also a number of ferry services connecting the danish islands . færger mellem landsdelene , trafikken.dk . retrieved 19 march 2009 . . see also . list of museums in denmark list of tourist attractions in denmark culture of denmark architecture of denmark art of denmark tourism in finland tourism in norway tourism in sweden