Amstrad PCW

development and launch . in 1984 , tandy corporation executive steve leininger , designer of the trs-80 model i , admitted that '' as an industry we have n't found any compelling reason to buy a computer for the home '' other than for word processing . amstrad 's founder alan sugar realised that most computers in the united kingdom were used for word processing at home , and allegedly sketched an outline design for a low cost replacement for typewriters during a flight to the far east . this design featured a single '' box '' containing all the components , including a page orientation display , which would be more convenient for displaying documents than the usual landscape orientation . however the portrait display was quickly eliminated because it would have been too expensive , and the printer also became a separate unit . to reduce the cost of the printer , amstrad commissioned an asic ( custom circuit ) from mej electronics , which had developed the hardware for amstrad 's earlier cpc-464 . two other veterans of the cpc-464 's creation played important roles , with roland perry managing the pcw project and locomotive software producing the locoscript word processing program and other software . the cp/m operating system was added at the last minute . during development the pcw 8256 / 8512 project was code-named '' joyce '' after sugar 's secretary . for the launch the product name '' zircon '' was jointly suggested by mej electronics and locomotive software , as both companies had been spun off from data recall , which had produced a word processing system called '' diamond '' in the 1970s . sugar , preferring a more descriptive name , suggested '' wpc '' standing for '' word processing computer '' , but perry pointed out that this invited jokes about women police constables . sugar reshuffled the initials and the product was launched as the '' personal computer word-processor '' , abbreviated to '' pcw '' . the advertising campaign featured trucks unloading typewriters to form huge scrap heaps , with the slogan '' it 's more than a word processor for less than most typewriters '' . in britain the system was initially sold exclusively through dixons , whose chairman shared sugar 's dream that computers would cease to be exclusive products for the technologically adept and would become consumer products . . impact on the computer market . in 1986 , john whitehead described the amstrad pcw as '' the bargain of the decade '' , and technology writer gordon laing said in 2007 , '' it represented fantastic value at a time when an ibm pc or a mac would cost a comparative fortune . '' at its united kingdom launch in september 1985 , the basic pcw model was priced at £399 plus value added tax , which included a printer , word processor program , the cp/m operating system and associated utilities , and a basic interpreter . software vendors quickly made a wide range of additional applications available , including accounting , spreadsheet and database programs , so that the system was able to support most of the requirements of a home or small business . shortly afterwards the tandy 1000 was introduced in the uk with the ms-dos operating system and a similar suite of business applications and became the only other ibm-compatible personal computer system available for less than £1,000 in britain . at the time the cheapest complete systems from apricot computers cost under £2,000 and the cheapest ibm pc system cost £2,400 . although competitors ' systems generally had more sophisticated features , including colour monitors , whitehead thought the amstrad pcw offered the best value for money . in the us the pcw was launched at a price of 799 , and its competitors were initially the magnavox videowriter and smith corona pwp , two word-processing systems whose prices also included a screen , keyboard and printer . the magazine popular science thought that the pcw could not compete as a general-purpose computer , because its use of non-standard 3-inch floppy disk drives and the rather old cp/m operating system would restrict the range of software available from expanding beyond the spreadsheet , typing tutor and cheque book balancing programs already on sale . however , the magazine predicted that the pcw 's large screen and easy-to-use word processing software would make it a formidable competitor for dedicated word processors in the home and business markets . the system was sold in the us via major stores , business equipment shops and electronics retailers . the pcw redefined the idea of '' best value '' in computers by concentrating on reducing the price , which totally disrupted the personal computer market . the low price encouraged home users to trade up from simpler systems like the sinclair spectrum , whose sales had passed their peak . according to personal computer world , the pcw '' got the technophobes using computers '' . in the first two years over 700,000 pcws were sold , gaining amstrad 60 % of the uk home computer market , and 20 % of the european personal computer market , second only to ibm 's 33.3 % share . having gained credibility as computer supplier , amstrad launched ibm-compatible pcs , once again focussing on low prices , with its pc1512 surpassing the ibm pc on performance and beating even the taiwanese clones on price . amstrad became the dominant british personal computer company , buying all the designs , marketing rights and product stocks of sinclair research ltd 's computer division in april 1986 , while apricot later sold its manufacturing assets to mitsubishi and became a software company . in the pcw 's heyday the magazines 8000 plus ( later called pcw plus ) and pcw today were published specifically for pcw users . in addition to the usual product reviews and technical advice , they featured other content such as articles by science fiction writer and software developer dave langford on his experiences of using the pcw . when the pcw line was retired in 1998 , 8 & nbsp ; million machines had been sold . the daily telegraph estimated in 2000 that 100,000 were still in use in the uk , and said that the reliability of the pcw 's hardware and software and the range of independently produced add-on software for its word processing program were factors in its continued popularity . laing says the pcw line 's downfall was that '' proper pcs became affordable '' . ibm , compaq and other vendors of more expensive computers had reduced prices drastically in an attempt to increase demand during the recession of the early 1990s . in 1993 the pcw still cost under £390 while a pc system with a printer and word processing software cost over £1,000 . however , after adjustment for inflation the retail price of a multimedia ibm-compatible pc in 1997 was about 11 % more than that of a pcw 8256 in 1985 , and many home pcs were cast-offs , sometimes costing as little as £50 , from large organisations that had upgraded their systems . also available at virtuallearning.org.uk users of windows , unix or macos systems who wish to run programs that were developed for the pcw 8256 , 8512 , 9256 , 9512 and 9512+ can use an emulator called '' joyce '' . there is also another one only for windows called '' cp/m box '' . models and features . pcw 8256 and 8512 . the pcw 8256 was launched in september 1985 , and had 256 & nbsp ; kb of ram and one floppy disk drive . launched a few months later , the pcw 8512 had 512 & nbsp ; kb of ram and two floppy disk drives . both systems consisted of three units : a printer ; a keyboard ; and a monochrome crt monitor whose casing included the processor , memory , motherboard , one or two floppy disk drives , the power supply for all the units and the connectors for the printer and keyboard . the monitor displayed green characters on a black background . it measured diagonally , and showed 32 lines of 90 characters each . the designers preferred this to the usual personal computer display of 25 80-character lines , as the larger size would be more convenient for displaying a whole letter . the monitor could also display graphics well enough for the bundled graphics program and for some games . the floppy disk drives on these models were in the unusual 3-inch '' compact floppy '' format , which was selected as it had a simpler electrical interface than 3½-inch drives . in the range 's early days supplies of 3-inch floppies occasionally ran out , but by 1988 the pcw 's popularity encouraged suppliers to compete for this market . there are several techniques for transferring data from a pcw to an ibm-compatible pc , some of which also can transfer in the opposite direction , and service companies that will do the job for a fee . while all the 3-inch disks were double-sided , the pcw 256 's 3-inch drive and the pcw 8512 's upper one were single-sided , while the 8512 's lower one was double-sided and double-density . hence there were two types of disk : single-density , which could store 180 & nbsp ; kb of data per side , equivalent to about 70 & nbsp ; pages of text each ; and double density , which could store twice as much per side . the double-density drive could read single-density disks , but it was inadvisable to write to them using this drive . users of single-sided drives had to flip the disks over to use the full capacity . the dot matrix printer had a sheet feed for short documents and a tractor attachment for long reports on continuous stationery . this unit could print 90 & nbsp ; characters per second at draft quality and 20 & nbsp ; characters per second at higher quality , and could also produce graphics . however it had only 9 printing pins and even its higher quality did not match that of 24-pin printers . the dot matrix printer was not very robust as its chassis was made entirely of plastic . users who needed to support higher print volumes or to produce graphics could buy a daisy wheel printer or plotter from amstrad . the daisy-wheel printer could not produce graphics . the keyboard had 82 keys , some of which were designed for word processing , especially with the bundled locoscript software – for example to cut , copy , and paste . non-english characters such as greek could be typed by holding down the alt or extra key , along with the shift key if capitals were required . other special key combinations activated caps lock , num lock and reboot . a wide range of upgrades became available . the pcw 8256 's ram could be expanded to 512 & nbsp ; kb for a hardware cost of about £50 . an additional internal floppy disk drive for the 8256 would cost about £100 , and installation was fairly easy . alternatively one could add external drives , for example if a 3½-inch drive was needed . graphical user interface devices such as light pens , mice and graphic tablets could be attached to the expansion socket at the back of the monitor . adding a serial interface connector , which cost about £50 , made it possible to attach a modem or non-amstrad printer . the designs were licensed to the german consumer electronics company schneider , which slightly modified their appearance and consequently sold them as '' joyce '' and '' joyce plus '' . the partnership between amstrad and schneider had been formed to market the amstrad cpc range of computers , and broke up when amstrad launched the pcw9512 . pcw 9512 and 9256 . the pcw 9512 , introduced in 1987 at a price of £499 plus vat , had a white-on-black screen instead of green-on-black , and the bundled printer was a daisy-wheel model instead of a dot-matrix printer . these models also had a parallel port , allowing non-amstrad printers to be attached . the 9512 was also supplied with version 2 of the locoscript word processor program which included spellchecker and mail merge facilities . in all other respects the 9512 's facilities were the same as the 8512's . in 1991 the 9512 was replaced by the pcw 9256 and 9512+ , both equipped with a single 3½-inch disk drive that could access 720 & nbsp ; kb . the 9512+ had 512 & nbsp ; kb of ram , and two printer options , the amstrad daisy-wheel unit and a series of considerably more expensive canon inkjet printers : initially the bj10e , later the bj10ex and finally the bj10sx . the 9256 had 256 & nbsp ; kb of ram and the same dot matrix printer as the 8256 and 8512 , as well as the older locoscript version 1 . . pcw 10 . this was a pcw 9256 with 512 & nbsp ; kb of ram , a parallel printer port , and locoscript 1.5 instead of locoscript 1 . the pcw 10 was not a success , and few were produced . by this time other systems offered much better print quality , and the pcw was a poor choice as a general-purpose computer , because of its slow cpu and incompatibility with ms-dos systems . . pcw16 . this model , whose display labelled it '' pcw16 '' , was introduced in 1995 at a price of £299 . despite its name it was totally incompatible with all previous pcw systems . instead of having two operating environments , locoscript for word processing and cp/m for other uses , it had its own gui operating system , known as '' rosanne '' . this could only run one application at a time , and starting another application made the previous one save all the files it had changed and then close . the bundled word processor was produced by creative technology , and could read locoscript files but saved them in its own format . the package also included a spreadsheet , address book , diary , calculator and file manager . amstrad never provided other applications , and very little third-party software was written for the machine . the display unit , which also contained the processor , motherboard and ram , was the standard 640×480 pixels in size and worked in vga mode . the pcw16 included a standard 1.4 & nbsp ; mb floppy drive . while competitors included hard disk drives with capacities of a few hundred & nbsp ; mb to a few gb , the pcw16 used a 1 & nbsp ; mb flash memory to store the programs and user files . like previous pcw models , the pcw16 used the 8-bit zilog z-80 cpu , which first appeared in 1976 , while other personal computers used 16-bit cpus or the more recent 32-bit cpus . the price included a mouse for use with the gui , but did not include a printer . in the magazine pcw plus dave langford expressed a series of concerns about the pcw16 : the operating system could not run the many cp/m programs available for previous pcw models ; the flash ram was too small for a large collection of programs , but programs could not be run from the floppy disk , which was designed for backing up files ; and a second-hand ibm pc with locoscript pro looked like a more sensible upgrade path for users of earlier pcws . few pcw16s were sold . . software . this section covers the pcw 8xxx , 9xxx and 10 series ; software for the pcw16 is described above . bundled . . locoscript word processor . the word processing software locoscript was included in the price of the hardware . the manual provided both a reference and a tutorial that could enable users to start work within 20 & nbsp ; minutes , and some users found the tutorial provided as much information as they ever needed . the program enabled users to divide documents into groups , display the groups on a disk and then the documents in the selected group , and set up a template for each group . the '' limbo file '' facility enabled users to recover accidentally deleted documents until the disk ran out of space , when the software would permanently delete files to make room for new ones . layout facilities included setting and using tab stops , production of page headers and footers , with automated page numbering ; typographical effects including proportional spacing , a range of font sizes , and bold , italic and underline effects . the cut , copy and paste facility provided 10 paste buffers , each designated by a number , and these could be saved to a disk . the menu system had two layouts , one for beginners and the other for experienced users . locoscript supported 150 characters and , if used with the dot matrix printer , could print european letters including greek and cyrillic , as well as mathematical and technical symbols . the program allowed the user to work on one document while printing another , so that the relative slowness of the basic printer seldom caused difficulties . locoscript did not run under the control of a standard operating system but booted directly from a floppy disk . users had to reboot if they wanted to switch between locoscript and a cp/m application , unless they used a utility called '' flipper '' , which could allocate separate areas of ram to locoscript and cp/m . locoscript version 1 , which was bundled with the pcw 8256 and 8512 , had no spell checker or mail merge facilities . version 2 , which was bundled with the pcw 9512 , included a spellchecker and could provide mail merge by interfacing to other products from locomotive software , such as locomail and locofile . locoscript 2 also expanded the character set to 400 . . cp/m operating system and applications . the pcw included a version of cp/m known as '' cp/m plus '' . this provided a range of facilities comparable to those of ms-dos , but imposed a significant limitation : it could not address more than 64 & nbsp ; kb of ram . since cp/m took 3 & nbsp ; kb of this , the most that cp/m applications could use was 61 & nbsp ; kb . the rest of the ram was used as a ram disk ( exposed under the drive letter '' m : '' for '' memory '' ) , which was much faster than a floppy disk but lost all its data when the machine was powered off . on the other hand , the standalone locoscript word processor program was able to use 154 & nbsp ; kb as normal memory , and the rest as a ram disk . mallard basic , like locoscript , was a locomotive software product , but ran under cp/m . this version of basic lacked built-in graphics facilities , but included jetsam , an implementation of isam that supported multiple indexes per file , so that programs could access records directly by specifying values of key fields . the cp/m software bundle also included the digital research implementation of seymour papert 's logo programming language and a graphics program that could produce pie charts and bar charts . . sold separately . many software vendors supplied versions of their products to run with cp/m plus , making a wide range of software available for the pcw , often very cheaply : alternative word processors included superwriter and wordstar . several spreadsheet programs became available , including supercalc ii and microsoft 's multiplan . database programs adapted for the pcw included sage database , cardbox and dbase ii . the microdesign , desk top publisher , newsdesk and stop press desktop publishing packages were used by groups of authors for newsletters . the sage group 's popular accounts and payroll , and the camsoft payroll and accounting software . other programming languages , including c . many games for the pcw . most were text adventures but there were also graphical games like batman , bounder and head over heels . . free software . many free packages could run under cp/m but required careful setting of options to run on the pcw series , although a significant number had installer programs that made this task easier . programs that were already configured for the pcw covered a broad range of requirements including word processors , databases , graphics , personal accounts , programming languages , games , utilities and a full-featured bulletin board system . many of these were at least as good as similar commercial offerings , but most had poor documentation . . technical design . all pcw models , including the pcw16 , used the zilog z80 range of cpus : z80a at a clock speed of 4 & nbsp ; mhz for the 8256 , 8512 , 9512 , 9256 , 9512+ and pcw10 ; and z80a at 16 & nbsp ; mhz in the pcw16 . the z80 could only access 64 & nbsp ; kb of ram at a time . software could work round this by bank switching , accessing different banks of memory at different times but this made programming more complex and slowed the system down . each pcw 's cp/m application could not use more than 64 & nbsp ; kb so the system used the rest of the ram for a ram drive . on the other hand , the standalone locoscript word processor program was reported as using up to 154 & nbsp ; kb as normal memory and the rest as a ram disk . unusually , the z80 cpu in the pcw 8256 , 8512 , 9512 , 9256 and 9512+ had no directly connected rom , which most computers used to start the booting . instead , at startup , the asic ( customised circuit ) at the heart of the pcw provided access to part of the 1k rom within the intel mcs-48 used to drive the printer . the z80 would copy 256 bytes via the asic into ram , providing sufficient instructions to load the first sector from a floppy . the rom-based code can not display text , being too small to support character generation ; instead , it displays a bright screen which is progressively filled by black stripes as the code is loaded from floppy . to make the printer cheap enough to be included with every pcw , amstrad placed the majority of its drive electronics inside the pcw cabinet . the printer case contained only electromechanical components and high current driver electronics ; its power was supplied via a coaxial power connector socket on the monitor casing , and rather than using a traditional ieee 1284 , pin and motor signals were connected directly by a 34-wire ribbon cable to an 8041 microcontroller on the pcw 's mainboard . most models of pcw were bundled with a 9-pin dot matrix printer mechanism , with the later 9512 and 9512+ models using a daisywheel ( with a different cable ; the printers were not interchangeable with the dot matrix models ) . these pcw printers could not , of course , be used on other computers , and the original pcw lacked a then-standard centronics printer port . instead , the z80 bus and video signals were brought to an edge connector socket at the back of the cabinet . many accessories including parallel and serial ports were produced for this interface . some of the later models included a built-in parallel port ; these could be bundled with either the dedicated amstrad printer or a canon bubblejet model . the machines were built around the 8-bit zilog z80 processor , running at 4 & nbsp ; mhz , and managed the relatively large amount of ram main memory using a technique known as bank switching ( allowing access to more than the z80 's normal 16-bit address bus reach of 64 & nbsp ; kb ) . the pcw divided ram into 16 & nbsp ; kb sections , of which four could be accessed at any time . in cp/m , the memory used for the display was switched out while programs were running , giving more than 60 & nbsp ; kb of usable ram . while the joyce architecture was designed with configurations of 128 & nbsp ; kb and 256 & nbsp ; kb of ram in mind , no pcw was ever sold with 128 & nbsp ; kb of ram . the pcws were not designed to play video games , although some software authors considered this a minor detail , releasing games like batman , head over heels , and bounder . the pcw video system was not at all suited to games . in order that it be able to display a full 80-column page plus margins , the display 's addressable area was 90 columns and the display had 32 lines . the display was monochrome and bitmapped with a resolution of 720 by 256 pixels . at 1 bit per pixel , this occupied 23 & nbsp ; kb of ram which was far too large for the z80 cpu to scroll in software without ripple and tearing of the display . instead , the pcw implemented a roller ram consisting of a 512-byte area of ram that held the address of each line of display data . the screen could now be scrolled either by changing the roller ram contents or by writing to an i/o port that set the starting point in roller ram for the screen data . this allowed for very rapid scrolling . the video system also fetched data in a special order designed so that plotting a character eight scan lines high would touch eight contiguous addresses . this meant that very fast z80 copy instructions like ldir could be used . unfortunately , it also meant that drawing lines and other shapes could be very complicated . the pcw16 does not share any hardware with the original pcw series , other than the z80 cpu , and should be considered to be a completely different machine . see also . amstrad cp/m plus character set amstrad cpc symbos list of amstrad pcw games ibm displaywriter system . references . external links . amstrad pcw & nbsp ; 16 page at www.old-computers.com amstrad pcw 8256/8512 at www.old-computers.com pcw joyce computer club screen shots of the pcw16 's rosanne gui pcw nostalgia . bbc web page . pcw emulator cp/m box