Borgward

origins of the component companies . the origins of the company go back to 1905 with the establishment in varel ( near bremen ) of hansa ( company ) and the foundation in bremen itself of namag , maker of the lloyd car . these two businesses merged in 1914 to form the '' hansa-lloyd-werke a.g . '' . after the war , in the troubled economic situation then confronting germany , the business failed to prosper and by the late 1920s faced bankruptcy . for carl borgward , already the successful creator of the goliath-blitzkarren business , the misfortunes of hansa-lloyd presented an opportunity to greatly expand the scope of his auto business , and he took control of it . . carl borgward 's first '' car '' , the blitzkarren . the first '' automobile '' carl borgward designed was the 1924 blitzkarren ( lightning cart ) , a tiny three-wheeled van with , which was an enormous success in the market gap it filled . traders with a small budget bought it for delivery . the reichspost ordered many of them for postal service . hansa-lloyd . in 1929 , borgward became the director of hansa-lloyd ag having been able to merge his goliath ( company ) with hansa-lloyd . the small goliath-blitzkarren had by now evolved into the three-wheeled timber-framed synthetic-leather-bodied 5 or 7 & nbsp ; hp goliath pionier . borgward turned his attention to the other businesses and led the development of the hansa konsul . in february 1937 , there came the new hansa borgward 2000 and in 1939 its name was shortened to borgward 2000 . odin , l.c . world in motion 1939 - the whole of the year 's automobile production . belvedere publishing , 2015 . asin : b00zln91zg . the 2000 model was followed by the borgward 2300 which remained in production until 1942 . after world war ii , in 1946 carl borgward used some of the brand names from businesses he had acquired over the years to found three separate companies : borgward , goliath and lloyd . this was intended to increase the quantity of steel allocated to his business at a time of austerity and rationing . for many purposes the companies would be run as a single entity ; but in a business operated by a man to whom delegation did not come naturally , the proliferation of legal entities nevertheless added unhelpful layers of complexity through the 1950s and encouraged a broadening of the range which in the end proved financially unsustainable with the sales volumes achievable . in 1949 the company presented the borgward hansa 1500 . one of the top engineers at borgward from 1938-1952 was dipl . ing . hubert m . meingast . isabella and p100 . production of the borgward isabella began in 1954 . the isabella would become borgward 's most popular model and remained in production for the life of the company . in 1959 the borgward p100 was introduced , equipped with pneumatic suspension . peter kurze : borgward typenkunde . delius klasing verlag , bielefeld 2009 , , page 84 and 96 . . sports racers . borgward introduced a line of 1500 & nbsp ; cc sports racers in the 1950s , with the 16-valve engine from these becoming a successful formula two power unit ( which was also used by some f1 privateers in 1961 ) . heinrich volker : silberpfeile aus bremen – rennsportwagen der borgward-werke . verlag peter kurze , bremen 2004 , . . financial problems . although borgward pioneered technical novelties in the german market such as air suspension and automatic transmission , the company had trouble competing in the marketplace . while larger companies like opel and vw took advantage of economies of scale and kept their prices low to gain market share , borgward 's cost structure was even higher than necessary for its size , as it basically operated as four tiny independent companies and never implemented such basic cost reduction strategies as joint development and parts sharing between the company 's makes . borgward suffered quality problems as well . the lloyd arabella was technically advanced as a water-cooled boxer with front-wheel drive , but plagued with problems such as water leakage and gearbox software glitches . lloyd lost money on the car even though it was more expensive than its direct competitors . controversial company bankruptcy . in 1961 , the company was forced into liquidation by creditors . carl borgward died in july 1963 , still insisting the company had been technically solvent . this proved to be true in the sense that after the creditors were paid in full , there was still 4.5 million marks left over from the business . borgward history . controversy over the bankruptcy persists . reports of difficulties at borgward surfaced in an article that appeared in germany 's news magazine der spiegel on 14 december 1960 . a spiegel article was highlighted by means of a picture of borgward , cigar in mouth , on the magazine 's front cover . it was strongly critical of his business approach , and included many of the arguments later advanced to explain or justify the company 's demise . the widest range of cars from any manufacturer in germany , produced by three till recently operationally autonomous companies ( borgward , goliath and lloyd ) was supporting a turnover of only 650 million marks , placing the overall sales value from the combined borgward auto businesses only in fifth position among germany 's auto-makers . the 70-year-old carl borgward 's '' hands-on '' insistence on an increasingly manic proliferation of new and modified models featuring adventurous , but under-developed technological innovations ( fast manische konstruierwut ) gave rise to components which too often did not work , broke down or fell apart , resulting in massive bills for pre-delivery remediation and/or post delivery warranty work that found their way back to the company . the december 1960 der spiegel article was not the only serious public criticism targeting borgward at this time : suddenly stridently negative ( if more succinct ) comments also turned up in the mass-market bild newspaper and in television reports . critical media commentaries also appeared concerning large loans to the borgward group provided by the local landesbank . it is apparent that the business was confronting cash-flow difficulties at the end of 1960 . capital intensive businesses such as auto manufacturing use their expensive machines and tools most efficiently if they use them constantly at full capacity , but the car market in europe in the 1950s/60s was more seasonal than today , with sales diminishing in winter , then peaking in the early summer months : borgward 's inventory of unsold cars at the end of 1960 was higher than usual , reflecting ambitious growth plans , most obviously in respect of the united states market the december 1960 der spiegel article speculated that of the 15,000 borgward cars ordered by the north american dealers in 1960 ( and of the 12,000 delivered to them ) 6,000 might have to be taken back following a slump in north american demand . ( borgward was not the only european auto maker hit by a north american slump in demand for imported cars during 1960 . in the same year two ships carrying renault dauphines were turned back in mid-atlantic because the docks in new york were overcrowded with unsold dauphines . '' ) at the end of december 1960 borgward approached the bank for a further one million marks of credit , the loan to be backed by a guarantee from the bremen ( state ) government which initially the bremen senators agreed to provide . however , following the flood of critical press comment the senators withdrew their guarantee . they now required carl borgward to pledge the company itself to the state in return for the guarantee . after a tense 13-hour meeting widely reported in a still hostile media , borgward agreed to the senate ’ s terms on 4 february 1961 , thereby averting the bankruptcy of the business . the bremen senate also insisted on appointing its own nominee as chairman of the company ’ s supervisory board . the man they chose was johannes semler whom reports generally describe as a “ wirtschaftsprüfer ” ( public auditor ) , though this designation , especially once translated into english , does less than full justice to the breadth of semler ’ s career . he had studied law at university and worked initially as a lawyer . the scion of a leading hamburg political family , in 1945 he had himself been a founding member of the centre-right csu party , and was a member of the bundestag between 1950 and 1953 . despite his hamburg origins , semler was by this time based in munich , with a network of contacts in the bavarian establishment that probably included fellow csu politician and the future german chancellor , ludwig erhard , who in 1948 had succeeded semler in a top administrative position within the bizone . the appointment of johannes semler as the representative of the bremen senators to chair the borgward supervisory board would , in retrospect , contribute to the controversy that followed the borgward bankruptcy . on 28 july 1961 , semler , as chairman of the supervisory board , joined the directors of the three companies borgward , goliath and lloyd to instigate proceedings for the establishment of a “ vergleichsverfahren ” , which would have provided for a court sanctioned administration ( law ) enabling the business to continue to trade while at the same time protecting the interests of creditors . a similar process in the usa would involve a chapter 11 bankruptcy . two months later , however , in september 1961 , the borgward and goliath businesses were declared bankrupt , followed in november by the lloyd business . subsequent “ conspiracy theorists ” have suggested that semler , for reasons of his own , never had any intention of allowing the borgward auto-businesses to survive . . conspiracy theory . carl borgward himself would not accept that the borgward , goliath and lloyd auto businesses were technically insolvent , and the fact that none of the companies ’ creditors lost money supports his case . in the light of what was known at the time , and increasingly in the light of subsequent events , the argument that the business was not really insolvent at all has , if anything , gained support . nevertheless , evaluation of the issues requires informed and careful judgement , and the opposite case can also be made , that had the company continued trading beyond 1961 there was no reasonable prospect that it would generate sufficient cash to repay existing debts within a contractually established or reasonable period nor , indeed , to repay all necessary subsequently incurred financing and other business debts . at best , borgward by the middle of 1961 was seen by potential investors and lenders as a much riskier prospect than it had been a year earlier . case for a conspiracy . it has been suggested that the media onslaught launched against borgward at the end of 1960 was part of a well orchestrated covert campaign by other german auto-makers , jealous of borgward 's success and spotting an opportunity to eliminate a significant rival . even now , the spiegel article of 14 december 1960 is strangely shrill , partisan , and out of line with the dry tone that characterised most serious business reporting at the time . johannes semler , appointed by the city fathers to chair the supervisory board , ostensibly in order to guide the business towards a more secure future , appeared a strange choice for the role despite his excellent network of contacts and long experience at the interface between business and public life . the appointment appeared stranger still after his simultaneous appointment , in 1960 , to the board of bmw in munich , his more recent political power base and by now his adopted home city . bmw had lost its old manufacturing facility in 1945 when eisenach had ended up under soviet control and since then had itself struggled to survive financially . cui bono ? . in fact , the appointment of semler to the bmw board was one of several events which , in rapid succession , marked an improvement in the fortunes of bmw . bmw had itself come close to bankruptcy in 1959 , but had been rescued thanks to a massive additional investment by herbert quandt , who became , behind the scenes , a remarkably successful “ hands-on ” principal bmw shareholder . key to the company 's future was a new saloon/sedan smaller and more sporty than a mercedes-benz yet larger than a volkswagen , and more stylish than anything then to be expected from opel or ford . quandt also recruited an energetic sales director for bmw called paul g . hahnemann who later would assert that the bmw 1500 , launched at the frankfurt motor show in september 1961 , created an important new niche in the german car market . hahnemann repeated his boast so often that he gained the soubriquet '' nischen-paule '' in the press . those who contend that semler 's role in the borgward bankruptcy was part of a conspiracy orchestrated on behalf of bmw to bring down borgward point out that the “ niche ” allegedly defined by the mid-weight bmws from 1961 bore an uncanny resemblance to the niche previously occupied by the borgward isabella during the 1950s . case against a conspiracy . cases against conspiracies are seldom as compelling as cases in support of conspiracies . nevertheless , carl borgward 's management style had never been collegial , and during several decades as a swash-buckling engineer-entrepreneur he had never shown much appetite for opinions at variance with his own . the spiegel article that kicked off the press onslaught in december 1960 included a withering attack on borgward for having recently laid off 2,000 people as part of a belated attempt to streamline administration and production . in a period of boom there was little doubt that the affected workers would have found job opportunities with other german automakers , but they would have needed to relocate away from bremen , and the spiegel 's description of carl borgward 's implementation of the redundancies savagely implied a singular absence of human sensitivity . one way and another , borgward had over several decades enjoyed plenty of opportunities to create enemies , able to feed toxic stories to the media without any need for a conspiracy among rival auto-makers . borgward 's approach to “ product planning ” was remarkably profligate . in west germany only opel , at this time , came close to borgward in terms of frequency of model changes and facelifts . but opel were backed by the financial muscle and the strong management support of general motors , the world 's largest auto-maker and at that time itself a fabulously profitable corporation . in contrast , borgward had only a generous ( but not bottomless ) credit facility from the local state bank which he coupled with a personal disinclination to delegate or discuss business decisions . opel , for all their flamboyant marketing and a domestic market share second only to that of volkswagen , at this time offered only two models , the rekord and the kapitän . it is difficult to keep up with how many different models the borgward group was supporting . in addition to various commercial vehicles , the 1961 passenger car range included the lloyd 600 , the lloyd arabella , the goliath 1100 ( rebadged in 1959 as the borgward 1100 ) , the borgward isabella and the borgward p100 . the company 's reputation for serious teething troubles on new models was not simply the result of malicious press reporting . borgward was managed by a 70-year-old autocrat without an obvious succession plan . at the height of the crisis talks in 1961 carl borgward received ( and robustly rejected ) a 200 million mark offer for his business from chrysler corporation . even without his own personal bmw connections , chairman semler might reasonably have concluded that the borgward business as then configured had no realistic prospect of remaining solvent for more than few more months without collapsing into a yet more destructive bankruptcy from which creditors would not recover all their cash , and which could easily end up with the company becoming a third significant foreign transplant to compete on financially unequal terms with the domestically-owned auto industry . post mortem . the german magazine der spiegel published a thoughtful piece in 1966 , implying that with a little more support , and if the proprietor had been more willing to take advice from his own directors , the borgward company could have easily overcome its financial problems of 1961 . but carl borgward was financially naive and reluctant to accept advice : his preferred source of credit had always involved shunning the banks and simply taking extra time to pay his creditors , rejecting advice on the financing of his business from his own finance director . by autumn 1960 he was holding on to unpaid creditor invoices worth more than 100 million marks for sheet metal and tyres alone . history of borgward given that all the company 's creditors were eventually paid in full , the liquidation decision appeared nevertheless to have been taken prematurely . . production in argentina . borgward argentina was founded in 1954 as a joint venture of carl f . borgward hmbh and iame ( aeronautics and mechanical industries ) intended to equip the rastrojero , a small pickup truck . the engine was manufactured at the plant that borgward had in the town of isidro casanova , buenos aires province , at a production rate of 20 units per day with almost 800 employees . the production of borgward isabella was carried out in cordoba city , by using argentine engines , local components ( glass , batteries , tires ) and other pieces from germany . this model production started in 1960 at the booming of argentina automotive industry development , with a production plan of 500 units for that year . when the german parent company closed its doors in 1961 , the operation happened to have local control , and continued for a short time to complete the total manufacture of 1,050 cars during its short life in argentine territory . . production in mexico . as part of the bankruptcy process , in 1963 , all manufacturing equipment for the borgward isabella and p100 was sold to a buyer in monterrey , mexico . production in mexico was delayed , but was started in august 1967 by entrepreneur gregorio ramirez gonzalez . production in mexico ceased in 1970 . . revival . in 2008 , the borgward group was formed in lucerne by christian borgward ( grandson of carl f . w . borgward ) and karlheinz l . knöss . the new company later moved to stuttgart . with both investment and manufacture by foton motor ( a subsidiary of baic , a major chinese automotive group ) , the borgward group had started to sell suvs by january 2017 . models . cars . borgward 2000 borgward 2300 lloyd arabella borgward hansa 1500 borgward hansa 1500 borgward hansa 1500 borgward hansa 2400 borgward isabella borgward p100 borgward 230 . trucks . borgward b 611 borgward b 622 borgward b 655 borgward b 1000 borgward b 1000z borgward b 1250 borgward b 1500 borgward b 1500f borgward b 2000 borgward b 2500 borgward b 3000 borgward b 4000 borgward b 4500 borgward b 522 borgward b 533 borgward b 544 borgward b 555 . military vehicles . sd.kfz . 301 borgward b iv sd.kfz . 302/303a/303b goliath tracked mine . aircraft . helicopters . borgward kolibri . see also . list of automobile manufacturers . references . external links . borgward drivers club uk borgward interessengemeinschaft essen ( in english ) borgward club of australia borgward registry dipl . ing . hubert m . meingast ( borgward engineer and research scientist ) ( in english ) interactive panorama from inside a borgward isabella interactive panorama from inside a hansa 1100 interactive panorama from inside a lloyd