Clément Marot

biography . youth . marot was born at cahors , the capital of the province of quercy , some time during the winter of 1496–1497 . his father , jean marot ( c . 1463-1523 ) , whose more correct name appears to have been des mares , marais or marets , was a norman from the caen region and was also a poet . jean held the post of escripvain ( a cross between poet laureate and historiographer ) to anne of brittany , queen of france . clément was the child of his second wife . the boy was '' brought into france '' — it is his own expression , and is not unnoteworthy as showing the strict sense in which that term was still used at the beginning of the 16th century — in 1506 . he appears to have been educated at the university of paris , and to have then begun studying law . jean marot instructed his son in the fashionable forms of verse-making , which called for some formal training . it was the time of the rhétoriqueurs , poets who combined stilted language with a fondness for the allegorical manner of the 15th century and the most complicated and artificial forms of the ballade and the rondeau . clément began as a '' rhétoriqueur '' , though he later helped overthrow this style . he wrote panegyrics to guillaume crétin and translated virgil 's first eclogue in 1512 . he soon gave up the study of law and became page to nicolas de neufville , seigneur de villeroy , which led to his introduction into court life . the house of valois , which would hold the throne of france for the greater part of a century , was devoted to literature . at the french court . as early as 1514 , before the accession of king francis i , clément presented to him his judgment of minos , and shortly afterward he was either styled or styled himself facteur ( poet ) de la reine to queen claude . in 1519 he was attached to the suite of marguerite d'alençon , the king 's sister , ( later to become marguerite de navarre ) , a great patron of the arts . he was also a great favourite of francis himself , attended the field of the cloth of gold in 1520 , and duly celebrated it in verse . in the next year he was at the camp in flanders , and wrote of the horrors of war . marot , like most of marguerite 's literary court , was attracted by her grace , her kindness , and her intellectual accomplishments , but there is no grounds for thinking that they had a romantic relationship . during this time his poetic style began to change , becoming much less artificial . some of his poems praise a lady named '' diane '' , whom some have identified with diane de poitiers . in paris . in 1524 , marot accompanied king francis on his disastrous italian campaign . the king was taken prisoner at the battle of pavia , but there are no grounds for supposing that marot was wounded or shared the king 's fate , and he was back in paris again by the beginning of 1525 . however , marguerite for intellectual reasons , and her brother for political , had until then favoured the double movement of '' aufklärung '' , partly humanist , partly reforming , which distinguished the beginning of the century . formidable opposition to both forms of innovation now began to appear , and marot , never particularly prudent , was arrested on a charge of heresy and lodged in the grand châtelet in february 1526 . this was only a foretaste of his coming trouble , and a friendly prelate , acting for marguerite , arranged his release before easter . the imprisonment caused him to write a vigorous poem entitled enfer ( hell ) , later imitated by his friend étienne dolet . his father died about this time , and marot seems to have been appointed in jean 's place as valet de chambre to the king . he was certainly a member of the royal household in 1528 with a stipend of 250 livres . in 1530 , probably , he married . the following year he was once again in trouble , this time for attempting to rescue a prisoner , and was again released , this time after marot wrote the king one of his most famous poems , appealing for his release . in 1532 he published ( it had perhaps appeared three years earlier ) , under the title of adolescence clémentine , the first printed collection of his works , which was very popular and was frequently reprinted with additions . unfortunately , the poet 's enemies ensured that marot was implicated in the 1534 affair of the placards , and this time he fled . in ferrara . he passed through nérac , the court of navarre , and made his way to renée , duchess of ferrara , a supporter of the protestant reformation in france—as steadfast as her sister-in-law marguerite , and even more efficacious , because her dominions were outside france . at ferrara his work there included the celebrated blasons ( a descriptive poem , improved upon medieval models ) , which set all the verse-writers of france imitating them . the blason was defined by thomas sébillet as a perpetual praise or continuous vituperation of its subject . the blasons of marot 's followers were printed in 1543 with the title of blasons anatomiques du corps féminin . back in paris . duchess renée was not able to persuade her husband , ercole d'este , to share her views , and marot had to leave ferrara . he went to venice , but before very long pope paul iii remonstrated with francis i on the severity with which the protestants were treated , and they were allowed to return to paris on condition of recanting their errors . marot returned with the rest , and abjured his heresy at lyon . in 1539 francis gave him a house and grounds in the suburbs . it was at this time that his famous and influential translations of the psalms appeared . each courtier identified his or her favorite psalms , and the poems were sung in the court and in the city . it is said , probably with exaggeration , that these translations did more than anything else to advance the cause of the protestant reformation in france . marot 's translations of the psalms continued to be sung for centuries by protestant congregations . later life . at the same time marot engaged in a literary quarrel with a poet named françois de sagon , who represented the sorbonne . verse-writers of france aligned themselves as marotiques or sagontiques , and abuse was exchanged . victory , as far as wit was concerned , was with marot , but at the cost of ill-will against him . marot edited the works of his fellow poet françois villon . although the psalms were published in 1541 and 1543 with royal privilege , the sorbonne still objected to translations from the bible into french . in 1543 , it was evident that marot could not rely on the protection of the king , therefore he left for geneva . after living working on the psalms there , as calvin became more influential , he went to piedmont . he died at turin in the autumn of 1544 and was buried in the cathedral there at the expense of the french ambassador to rome . editions . the most important early editions of marot 's œuvres were published at lyon in 1538 and 1544 . in the second of these the arrangement of his poems which has been accepted in later issues was first adopted ; in 1596 an enlarged edition was edited by françois mizière . the parisian printer denis janot , however , also printed several important editions of books by marot . others of later date are those of nicolas lenglet du fresnoy ( the hague , 1731 ) and p . jannet ( 1868–1872 ; new ed . , 1873–1876 ) , on the whole the best , but there is a very good selection with a still better introduction by charles d'héricault , the joint editor of the jannet edition in the larger collection garnier ( no date ) . from an elaborate edition by g . guiffrey only vol . ii and iii appeared during his lifetime . robert yve-plessis and jean plattard completed the edition in 5 vols ( paris , 1874-1931 ) . the first 'scientific ' edition is by c . a . mayer in 6 vols . ( 1958-1980 ) , which follows the arrangement of the material in 'genres ' ( like the edition 1544 ) . the last complete scientific edition is by gérard defaux in 2 vols . ( 1990–92 ) . defaux adopts the editing principles of marot himself , as deducible from his own 1538 edition , mentioned above . influence . many of marot 's texts were set as chansons , particularly by his contemporary claudin de sermisy . douglas hofstadter 's book le ton beau de marot , deals with the problems of translation , and includes several dozen different translations of marot 's poem a une damoyselle malade . both maurice ravel and george enescu composed song settings of marot 's poems . wilhelm killmayer set one of his poems in his song cycle in 1953 , and another in in 1968 . . references . . external links . pictures of marot c a mayer memorial trust