Q-switching

principle of q-switching . q-switching is achieved by putting some type of variable attenuator inside the laser 's optical resonator . when the attenuator is functioning , light which leaves the gain medium does not return , and lasing can not begin . this attenuation inside the cavity corresponds to a decrease in the q factor or quality factor of the optical resonator . a high q factor corresponds to low resonator losses per roundtrip , and vice versa . the variable attenuator is commonly called a '' q-switch '' , when used for this purpose . initially the laser medium is pumped while the q-switch is set to prevent feedback of light into the gain medium ( producing an optical resonator with low q ) . this produces a population inversion , but laser operation can not yet occur since there is no feedback from the resonator . since the rate of stimulated emission is dependent on the amount of light entering the medium , the amount of energy stored in the gain medium increases as the medium is pumped . due to losses from spontaneous emission and other processes , after a certain time the stored energy will reach some maximum level ; the medium is said to be gain saturated . at this point , the q-switch device is quickly changed from low to high q , allowing feedback and the process of optical amplifier by stimulated emission to begin . because of the large amount of energy already stored in the gain medium , the intensity of light in the laser resonator builds up very quickly ; this also causes the energy stored in the medium to be depleted almost as quickly . the net result is a short pulse of light output from the laser , known as a giant pulse , which may have a very high peak intensity . there are two main types of q-switching : . active q-switching . here , the q-switch is an externally controlled variable attenuator . this may be a mechanical device such as a shutter , chopper wheel , or spinning mirror/prism placed inside the cavity , or ( more commonly ) it may be some form of modulator such as an acousto-optic device , a magneto-optic effect device or an electro-optic device — a pockels cell or kerr cell . the reduction of losses ( increase of q ) is triggered by an external event , typically an electrical signal . the pulse repetition rate can therefore be externally controlled . modulators generally allow a faster transition from low to high q , and provide better control . an additional advantage of modulators is that the rejected light may be coupled out of the cavity and can be used for something else . alternatively , when the modulator is in its low-q state , an externally generated beam can be coupled into the cavity through the modulator . this can be used to '' seed '' the cavity with a beam that has desired characteristics ( such as transverse mode or wavelength ) . when the q is raised , lasing builds up from the initial seed , producing a q-switched pulse that has characteristics inherited from the seed . passive q-switching . in this case , the q-switch is a saturable absorber , a material whose transmission increases when the intensity of light exceeds some threshold . the material may be an ion-doped crystal like cr-yag , which is used for q-switching of nd-yag laser , a bleachable dye , or a passive semiconductor device . initially , the loss of the absorber is high , but still low enough to permit some lasing once a large amount of energy is stored in the gain medium . as the laser power increases , it saturates the absorber , i.e . , rapidly reduces the resonator loss , so that the power can increase even faster . ideally , this brings the absorber into a state with low losses to allow efficient extraction of the stored energy by the laser pulse . after the pulse , the absorber recovers to its high-loss state before the gain recovers , so that the next pulse is delayed until the energy in the gain medium is fully replenished . the pulse repetition rate can only indirectly be controlled , e.g . by varying the laser 's pump power and the amount of saturable absorber in the cavity . direct control of the repetition rate can be achieved by using a pulsed pump source as well as passive q-switching . variants . image : regenerative amplifier.png thumb right regenerative amplifier . red line : laser beam . red box : gain medium . top : aom-based design . bottom : the pockel ’ s cell-based design needs thin film polarizers . the direction of the emitted pulse depends on the timing . jitter can be reduced by not reducing the q by as much , so that a small amount of light can still circulate in the cavity . this provides a '' seed '' of light that can aid in the buildup of the next q-switched pulse . with cavity dumper , the cavity end mirrors are 100 % reflective , so that no output beam is produced when the q is high . instead , the q-switch is used to '' dump '' the beam out of the cavity after a time delay . the cavity q goes from low to high to start the laser buildup , and then goes from high to low to '' dump '' the beam from the cavity all at once . this produces a shorter output pulse than regular q-switching . electro-optic modulators are normally used for this , since they can easily be made to function as a near-perfect beam '' switch '' to couple the beam out of the cavity . the modulator that dumps the beam may be the same modulator that q-switches the cavity , or a second ( possibly identical ) modulator . a dumped cavity is more complicated to align than simple q-switching , and may need a control loop to choose the best time at which to dump the beam from the cavity . in regenerative amplification , an optical amplifier is placed inside a q-switched cavity . pulses of light from another laser ( the '' master oscillator '' ) are injected into the cavity by lowering the q to allow the pulse to enter and then increasing the q to confine the pulse to the cavity where it can be amplified by repeated passes through the gain medium . the pulse is then allowed to leave the cavity via another q switch . typical performance . a typical q-switched laser ( e.g . a nd : yag laser ) with a resonator length of e.g . 10 & nbsp ; cm can produce light pulses of several tens of 1 e-9 s duration . even when the average power is well below 1 w , the peak power can be many kilowatts . large-scale laser systems can produce q-switched pulses with energies of many joules and peak powers in the gigawatt region . on the other hand , passively q-switched microchip lasers ( with very short resonators ) have generated pulses with durations far below one nanosecond and pulse repetition rates from hundreds of hertz to several megahertz ( mhz ) . applications . q-switched lasers are often used in applications which demand high laser intensities in nanosecond pulses , such as metal cutting or pulsed holography . nonlinear optics often takes advantage of the high peak powers of these lasers , offering applications such as 3d optical data storage and 3d microfabrication . however , q-switched lasers can also be used for measurement purposes , such as for distance measurements ( range finding ) by measuring the time it takes for the pulse to get to some target and the reflected light to get back to the sender . it can be also used in chemical dynamic study , e.g . temperature jump relaxation study . q-switched lasers are also used to remove tattoos by shattering ink pigments into particles that are cleared by the body 's lymphatic system . full removal can take between six and twenty treatments depending on the amount and colour of ink , spaced at least a month apart , using different wavelengths for different coloured inks . nd : yag lasers are currently the most favoured lasers due to their high peak powers , high repetition rates and relatively low costs . in 2013 a picosecond laser was introduced based on clinical research which appears to show better clearance with 'difficult ' colours such as green and light blue . q-switched lasers can also be used to remove dark spots and fix other skin pigmentation issues . see also . laser construction gain-switching injection seeder . references .