Liberty Hyde Bailey

biography . born in south haven , michigan , as the third son of farmers liberty hyde bailey sr . and sarah harrison bailey . in 1876 bailey met lucy millington who encouraged his interest in botany and mentored him . bailey entered the michigan agricultural college ( mac , now michigan state university ) in 1878 and graduated in 1882 . the next year , he became assistant to the renowned botanist asa gray , of harvard university . this was arranged by a professor at mac , william james beal . bailey spent two years with gray as his herbarium assistant . the same year , he married annette smith , the daughter of a michigan cattle breeder , whom he met at the michigan agricultural college . they had two daughters , sara may , born in 1887 , and ethel zoe , born in 1889 . in 1884 bailey returned to mac to become professor and chair of the horticulture and landscape gardening department , establishing the first horticulture department in the country . in 1888 , he moved to cornell university in ithaca , new york , where he assumed the chair of practical and experimental horticulture . he was elected an associate fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1900 . he founded the college of agriculture , and in 1904 he was able to secure public funding . he was dean of what was then known as new york state college of agriculture from 1903-1913 . in 1908 , he was appointed chairman of the national commission on country life by president theodore roosevelt . its 1909 report called for rebuilding a great agricultural civilization in america . in 1913 , he retired to become a private scholar and devote more time to social and political issues . in 1917 he was elected a member of the united states national academy of sciences . he edited the cyclopedia of american agriculture ( 1907–09 ) , the cyclopedia of american horticulture ( 1900–02 ) ( continued as the standard cyclopedia of horticulture ( 1916–1919 ) and the rural science , rural textbook , gardencraft , and young folks library series of manuals . he was the founding editor of the journals country life in america and the cornell countryman . he dominated the field of horticultural literature , writing some sixty-five books , which together sold more than a million copies , including scientific works , efforts to explain botany to laypeople , a collection of poetry ; edited more than a hundred books by other authors and published at least 1,300 articles and over 100 papers in pure taxonomy . he also coined the words '' cultivar '' , bailey , l.h . ( 1923 ) . various cultigens , and transfers in nomenclature . gentes herb . 1 : 113-136 '' cultigen '' , bailey , l.h . ( 1918 ) . the indigen and the cultigen . science ser . 2 , 47 : 306-308 . and '' indigen '' . his most significant and lasting contributions were in the botanical study of cultivated plants . bailey 's publisher was george platt brett , sr . of macmillan publishers ( united states ) . . death . bailey and his family are interred in a grand egyptian revival styled mausoleum of his own design at lake view cemetery in ithaca , new york . . rediscovery of gregor mendel 's work . bailey was one of the first to recognize the overall importance of gregor mendel 's work . he cited mendel 's 1865 and 1869 papers in the bibliography that accompanied his 1892 paper , '' cross breeding and hybridizing . '' mendel is mentioned again in the 1895 edition of bailey 's '' plant breeding . '' '' the role of liberty hyde bailey and hugo de vries in the rediscovery of mendelism , '' conway zirkle , journal of the history of biology , vol . 1 , no . 2 ( autumn , 1968 ) , pp . 205-218 . here is an excerpt : '' de vries as we have noted , gave three different accounts , and this leads us to liberty hyde bailey ( 1858-1954 ) . in a letter to bailey , de vries stated that he was led to mendel 's work by an item in a bibliography that bailey had published in 1892 . bailey inserted an excerpt from this letter in a footnote in the later editions of his book , plant breeding , a very successful book that went through several editions . de vries wrote ( from the fourth edition , 1906 , p . 155 ) : many years ago you had the kindness to send me your article on cross breeding and hybridization of 1892 ; and i hope it will interest you to know that it was by means of your bibliography therein that i learned some years afterwards of the existence of mendel 's papers , which now are coming to so high credit . without your aid i fear i should not have found them at all . some years later ( 1924 ) , de vries gave another and different account in a letter he wrote to roberts . '' conway zirkle : '' the role of liberty hyde bailey and hugo de vries in the rediscovery of mendelism , '' the journal of the history of biology , vol . 1 , no . 2 / september , 1968 . '' l.h . bailey 's citations to gregor mendel '' in : michael h . macroberts , the journal of heredity 1984:75 ( 6 ) :500-501 . here 's part of the abstract : '' l . h . bailey cited mendel 's 1865 and 1869 papers in the bibliography that accompanied his 1892 paper , cross-breeding and hybridizing , and mendel is mentioned once in the 1895 edition of bailey 's plant-breeding . bailey also saw a reference to mendel 's 1865 paper in jackson 's guide to the literature of botany . bailey 's 1895 mention of mendel occurs in a passage he translated from focke 's die pflanzen-mischlinge . '' . agrarian ideology . bailey represented an agrarianism that stood in the tradition of thomas jefferson . he had a vision of suffusing all higher education , including horticulture , with a spirit of public work and integrating '' expert knowledge '' into a broader context of democratic community action . stephen l . elkin , karol edward sołtan : citizen competence and democratic institutions p . 272 . penn state press , 1999 . as a leader of the country life movement , he strove to preserve the american rural civilization , which he thought was a vital and wholesome alternative to the impersonal and corrupting city life . in contrast to other progressive thinkers at the time , he endorsed the family , which , he recognized , played a unique role in socialization . especially the family farm had a benign influence as a natural cooperative unit where everybody had real duties and responsibilities . the independence it fostered made farmers '' a natural correction against organization men , habitual reformers , and extremists '' . it was necessary to uphold fertility in order to maintain the welfare of future generations . allan c carlson : the new agrarian mind chapter 1 '' toward a new rural civilization : liberty hyde bailey '' according to bailey , the american rural population , however , was backward , ignorant and saddled with inadequate institutions . the key to his reform program was guidance by an educated elite toward a new social order . the extension system was partly pioneered by bailey . the grander design of a new rural social structure needed a philosophical vision that could inspire and motivate . for this purpose , he wrote mother earth , a '' powerful testament to nature as god and to the farmer as acolyte and collaborator in the process of ongoing creation '' . it conformed largely to the freemason creed that bailey had been brought up with , and it was not explicit in demanding that traditional christian dogma be discarded . bailey 's real legacy was , according to allan c . carlson , the themes and direction that he gave the new agrarian movement , ideas very different from previous agrarian thought . he saw technological innovation as friendly to the family farm and inevitably resulting in decentralization . he was scornful of the actual forms of peasant life and wanted to transform it by cutting the farmers loose from '' the slavery of old restraints '' . parochial and communal social groups should be broken down and replaced by '' inter–neighborhood '' and '' inter–community '' groups , while new leaders would be called in '' who will promote inclusive rather than exclusive sociability . '' bailey and his followers held a quasi–religious faith in education by enlightened experts , which meant suppression of inherited ways and substitution by progressive ways . it was accompanied by a corresponding hostility to traditional religion . bailey 's simultaneous embrace of the rural civilization and of technological progress had been based on a denial of the possibility of overproduction of farm products . when that became a reality in the 1920s , he turned to a '' new economics '' that would give farmers special treatment . finally , after desperately toying with communism , he had to choose between fewer farmers and farm families and restraint on technology or production . he chose to preserve technology rather than the family farms . after this , he retreated from the country life movement into scientific study . bailey 's influence on modern american agrarianism remains determinative . the inherent contradictions of his ideas have been equally persistent : the tension between real farmers and rural people and the country life campaign ; difficulties to understand the operative economic forces ; the reliance on state schools to safeguard family farms ; and hostility to traditional christian faith . . palm studies . bailey made significant contributions to the taxonomic study of palms . his interest in the plants reportedly stemmed from his inability to answer his wife ’ s questions about the plants during a family trip to jamaica in 1910 . after retiring as dean of the cornell university college of agriculture and life sciences in 1913 , he devoted the better part of three decades to finding , collecting , and writing about palms . he developed a detailed method of collecting palm specimens that included photographing the tree in its entirety , preserving flowers and fruits in alcohol , pressing flower clusters , and carefully folding sections of the leaves to fit herbarium sheets . bailey traveled extensively in search of palms and other plants . in the 1920s , he was often accompanied by his daughter and scientific collaborator , ethel zoe bailey . already in his fifties when he began studying palms , bailey continued to collect into his 90s . he was frequently abroad on his birthday , march 15th . thus , he could recall spending his 79 th in port-au-prince , his 82 nd in oaxaca , his 88 th in trinidad , his 90 th in grenada , and his 91 st at sea on a small sailboat between sint eustatius and saint kitts . friends and colleagues at cornell hoped to hold a 90 th birthday celebration for bailey , and they did , but only after their guest of honor returned to ithaca in may . when bailey began studying palms , about 700 species had been identified . the number reached thousand by 1946 , the rise due in large part to his intensive study of the family . ill health finally forced bailey to discontinue collecting abroad in 1949 , at the age of 91 . he continued to study , compare , and write about his palm specimens . his ultimate goal was to produce an authoritative guide to all palms , titled genera palmarum . when he died , he left behind a manuscript of the first page of the introduction . genera palmarum was ultimately published by drs . natalie uhl and john dransfield in 1987 . a second , expanded , edition was released in 2008 . . legacy . bailey was awarded the veitch memorial medal of the royal horticultural society in 1897 . cornell has memorialized bailey by dedicating bailey hall in his honor . since 1958 the american horticultural society has issued the annual liberty hyde bailey award . a residence hall in brody complex at michigan state university , and an elementary school in east lansing , michigan , were also named after him . in 1928 , a tree ( sterculia foetida ) dedicated to bailey was planted at the university of hawai ' i at mānoa campus arboretum , and is now listed there as an exceptional tree . about 140 years after his birth , the liberty hyde bailey scholars program was created at michigan state university , the institution of higher learning where bailey began his career . the bailey scholars program incorporates l.h . bailey 's love of learning and expressive learning styles to provide a space for students to become educated in fields that interest them . some selected works . talks afield about plants and the science of plants ( 1885 ) field notes on apple culture ( 1886 ) the survival of the unlike ( 1896 ) the forcing-book ( 1897 ) the principles of fruit-growing ( 1897 ) the nursery book ( 1897 ) plant-breeding ( 1897 ) the pruning manual ( 1898 ) sketch of the evolution of our native fruits ( 1898 ) principles of agriculture ( 1898 ) cyclopedia of american horticulture ( 1900 , fifth edition , 1906 ) subsequently revised and renamed as the standard cyclopedia of horticulture , 2nd . ed . 1917 , 3rd . ed . 1919 the principles of vegetable gardening ( 1901 ) the nature-study idea ( 1903 ) the outlook to nature ( 1905 ) the state and the farmer ( 1908 ) the training of farmers ( 1909 ) animal biology ; human biology . parts ii & iii of first course in biology with w.m . coleman ( 1910 ) manual of gardening ( 1910 ) the country life movement ( 1911 ) the practical garden book ( 1913 ) the holy earth ( 1915 ) wind and weather ( poetry ) ( 1916 ) universal service ( 1918 ) what is democracy ? ( 1918 ) the seven stars ( 1923 ) the harvest : of the year to the tiller of the soil ( 1927 ) the garden lover ( 1928 ) the horticulturist 's rule-book farm and garden rule-book how plants get their names . selected articles . bailey , l.h . - canna x generalis . hortus , 118 ( 1930 ) ; cf . standley & steyerm . in fieldiana , bot . , xxiv . iii.204 ( 1952 ) . bailey , l.h . - canna x orchiodes . gentes herb . ( ithaca ) , 1 ( 3 ) : 120 ( 1923 ) .