Aliasing

description . when a digital image is viewed , a reconstruction is performed by a display or printer device , and by the eyes and the brain . if the image data is processed in some way during sampling or reconstruction , the reconstructed image will differ from the original image , and an alias is seen . an example of spatial aliasing is the moiré pattern observed in a poorly pixelized image of a brick wall . spatial anti-aliasing techniques avoid such poor pixelizations . aliasing can be caused either by the sampling stage or the reconstruction stage ; these may be distinguished by calling sampling aliasing prealiasing and reconstruction aliasing postaliasing . temporal aliasing is a major concern in the sampling of video and audio signals . music , for instance , may contain high-frequency components that are inaudible to humans . if a piece of music is sampled at 32,000 sampling rate ( hz ) , any frequency components at or above 16,000 hz ( the nyquist frequency for this sampling rate ) will cause aliasing when the music is reproduced by a digital-to-analog converter ( dac ) . the high frequencies in the analog signal will appear as lower frequencies ( wrong alias ) in the recorded digital sample and , hence , can not be reproduced by the dac . to prevent this , an anti-aliasing filter is used to remove components above the nyquist frequency prior to sampling . in video or cinematography , temporal aliasing results from the limited frame rate , and causes the wagon-wheel effect , whereby a spoked wheel appears to rotate too slowly or even backwards . aliasing has changed its apparent frequency of rotation . a reversal of direction can be described as a negative frequency . temporal aliasing frequencies in video and cinematography are determined by the frame rate of the camera , but the relative intensity of the aliased frequencies is determined by the shutter timing ( exposure time ) or the use of a temporal aliasing reduction filter during filming . tessive , llc ( 2010 ) . '' time filter technical explanation '' like the video camera , most sampling schemes are periodic ; that is , they have a characteristic sampling frequency in time or in space . digital cameras provide a certain number of samples ( pixels ) per degree or per radian , or samples per mm in the focal plane of the camera . audio signals are sampled ( digitized ) with an analog-to-digital converter , which produces a constant number of samples per second . some of the most dramatic and subtle examples of aliasing occur when the signal being sampled also has periodic content . bandlimited functions . actual signals have a finite duration and their frequency content , as defined by the fourier transform , has no upper bound . some amount of aliasing always occurs when such functions are sampled . functions whose frequency content is bounded ( bandlimited ) have an infinite duration in the time domain . if sampled at a high enough rate , determined by the bandwidth , the original function can , in theory , be perfectly reconstructed from the infinite set of samples . bandpass signals . sometimes aliasing is used intentionally on signals with no low-frequency content , called bandpass signals . undersampling , which creates low-frequency aliases , can produce the same result , with less effort , as frequency-shifting the signal to lower frequencies before sampling at the lower rate . some digital channelizers exploit aliasing in this way for computational efficiency . see sampling ( signal processing ) , nyquist rate ( relative to sampling ) , and filter bank . sampling sinusoidal functions . sinusoids are an important type of periodic function , because realistic signals are often modeled as the summation of many sinusoids of different frequencies and different amplitudes ( for example , with a fourier series or transform ) . understanding what aliasing does to the individual sinusoids is useful in understanding what happens to their sum . when sampling a function at frequency & nbsp ; is met for the highest frequency component of the original signal , then it is met for all the frequency components , a condition called the nyquist criterion . that is typically approximated by filtering the original signal to attenuate high frequency components before it is sampled . these attenuated high frequency components still generate low-frequency aliases , but typically at low enough amplitudes that they do not cause problems . a filter chosen in anticipation of a certain sample frequency is called an anti-aliasing filter . the filtered signal can subsequently be reconstructed , by interpolation algorithms , without significant additional distortion . most sampled signals are not simply stored and reconstructed . but the fidelity of a theoretical reconstruction ( via the whittaker–shannon interpolation formula ) is a customary measure of the effectiveness of sampling . historical usage . historically the term aliasing evolved from radio engineering because of the action of superheterodyne receivers . when the receiver shifts multiple signals down to lower frequencies , from rf to if by heterodyne , an unwanted signal , from an rf frequency equally far from the local oscillator ( lo ) frequency as the desired signal , but on the wrong side of the lo , can end up at the same if frequency as the wanted one . if it is strong enough it can interfere with reception of the desired signal . this unwanted signal is known as an image or alias of the desired signal . angular aliasing . aliasing occurs whenever the use of discrete elements to capture or produce a continuous signal causes frequency ambiguity . spatial aliasing , particular of angular frequency , can occur when reproducing a light field the ( new ) stanford light field archive or sound field with discrete elements , as in 3d displays or wave field synthesis of sound . this aliasing is visible in images such as posters with lenticular printing : if they have low angular resolution , then as one moves past them , say from left-to-right , the 2d image does not initially change ( so it appears to move left ) , then as one moves to the next angular image , the image suddenly changes ( so it jumps right ) – and the frequency and amplitude of this side-to-side movement corresponds to the angular resolution of the image ( and , for frequency , the speed of the viewer 's lateral movement ) , which is the angular aliasing of the 4d light field . the lack of parallax on viewer movement in 2d images and in 3-d film produced by stereoscopy glasses ( in 3d films the effect is called '' yawing '' , as the image appears to rotate on its axis ) can similarly be seen as loss of angular resolution , all angular frequencies being aliased to 0 ( constant ) . more examples . online audio example . the qualitative effects of aliasing can be heard in the following audio demonstration . six sawtooth waves are played in succession , with the first two sawtooths having a fundamental frequency of 440 & nbsp ; hz ( a4 ) , the second two having fundamental frequency of 880 & nbsp ; hz ( a5 ) , and the final two at 1,760 & nbsp ; hz ( a6 ) . the sawtooths alternate between bandlimited ( non-aliased ) sawtooths and aliased sawtooths and the sampling rate is 22,05 & nbsp ; khz . the bandlimited sawtooths are synthesized from the sawtooth waveform 's fourier series such that no harmonics above the nyquist frequency are present . the aliasing distortion in the lower frequencies is increasingly obvious with higher fundamental frequencies , and while the bandlimited sawtooth is still clear at 1,760 & nbsp ; hz , the aliased sawtooth is degraded and harsh with a buzzing audible at frequencies lower than the fundamental . direction finding . a form of spatial aliasing can also occur in antenna arrays or microphone arrays used to estimate the direction of arrival of a wave signal , as in geophysical exploration by seismic waves . waves must be sampled more densely than two points per wavelength , or the wave arrival direction becomes ambiguous . james l . flanagan , '' beamwidth and useable bandwidth of delay-steered microphone arrays '' , at & t tech . j . , 1985 , 64 , pp . 983–995