Micropsia

signs and symptoms . micropsia causes affected individuals to perceive objects as being smaller or more distant than they actually are . the majority of individuals with micropsia are aware that their perceptions do not mimic reality . many can imagine the actual sizes of objects and distances between objects . it is common for patients suffering from micropsia to be able to indicate true size and distance despite their inability to perceive objects as they actually are . one specific patient was able to indicate the dimensions of specific objects with her hands . she was also able to estimate the distances between two objects and between an object and herself . she succeeded in indicating horizontal , vertical , and 45 degree positions and did not find it difficult to search for an object in a cluttered drawer , indicating that her figure-ground discrimination was intact despite suffering from micropsia . individuals experiencing hemimicropsia often complain that objects in their left or right visual field appear to be shrunken or compressed . they may also have difficulty appreciating the symmetry of pictures . when drawing , patients often have a tendency to compensate for their perceptual asymmetry by drawing the left or right half of objects slightly larger than the other . in a case of one person with hemimicropsia asked to draw six symmetrical objects , the size of the picture on the left half was on average 16 % larger than the corresponding right half . . diagnosis . eeg testing can diagnose patients with temporal lobe epilepsy . epileptiform abnormalities including spikes and sharp waves in the temporal lobe of the brain can diagnose this condition , which can in turn be the cause of an epilepsy patient 's micropsia . eeg the amsler grid can be used to diagnose macular degeneration . for this test , patients are asked to look at a grid , and distortions or blank spots in the patient 's central field of vision can be detected . a positive diagnosis of macular degeneration may account for a patient 's micropsia . a controlled size comparison task can be employed to evaluate objectively whether a person is experiencing hemimicropsia . for each trial , a pair of horizontally aligned circles is presented on a computer screen , and the person being tested is asked to decide which circle is larger . after a set of trials , the overall pattern of responses should display a normal distance effect where the more similar the two circles , the higher the number of errors . this test is able to effectively diagnose micropsia and confirm which hemisphere is being distorted . due to the large range of causes that lead to micropsia , diagnosis varies among cases . computed tomography ( ct ) and magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) may find lesions and hypodense areas in the temporal and occipital lobes . mri and ct techniques are able to rule out lesions as the cause for micropsia , but are not sufficient to diagnose the most common causes . definition . micropsia is the most common visual distortion , or dysmetropsia . it is categorized as an illusion in the positive phenomena grouping of abnormal visual distortions . convergence micropsia is a physiologic phenomenon in which an object appears smaller as it approaches the subject . psychogenic micropsia can present itself in individuals with certain psychiatric disorders . retinal micropsia is characterized by an increase in the distance between retinal photoreceptors and is associated with decreased visual acuity . cerebral micropsia is a rare form of micropsia that can arise in children with chronic migraines . hemimicropsia is a type of cerebral micropsia that occurs within one half of the visual field . . differential diagnosis . of all of the visual distortions , micropsia has the largest variety of causes . . migraines . micropsia can occur during the aura phase of a migraine attack , a phase that often precedes the onset of a headache and is commonly characterized by visual disturbances . micropsia , along with hemianopsia , quadrantopsia , scotoma , phosphene , teicopsia , metamorphopsia , macropsia , teleopsia , diplopia , dischromatopsia , and hallucination disturbances , is a type of aura that occurs immediately before or during the onset of a migraine headache . the symptom usually occurs less than thirty minutes before the migraine headache begins and lasts for five to twenty minutes . only 10-20 % of children with migraine headaches experience auras . visual auras such as micropsia are most common in children with migraines . web-md : migraines in children . seizures . the most frequent neurological origin of micropsia is a result of temporal lobe seizures . these seizures affect the entire visual field of the patient . more rarely , micropsia can be part of purely visual seizures . this in turn only affects one half of the visual field and is accompanied by other cerebral visual disturbances . the most common cause of seizures which produce perceptual disturbances such as micropsia and macropsia is temporal lobe epilepsy in which the seizures originate in the amygdala-hippocampus complex . micropsia often occurs as an aura signalling a seizure in patients with medial temporal lobe epilepsy . most auras last for a very short period , ranging from a few seconds to a few minutes . . drug use . micropsia can result from the action of mescaline and other hallucinogenic drugs . although drug-induced changes in perception usually subside as the chemical leaves the body , long-term cocaine use can result in the chronic residual effect of micropsia . micropsia can be a symptom of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder , or hppd , in which a person can experience hallucinogenic flashbacks long after ingesting a hallucinogen . a majority of these flashbacks are visual distortions which include micropsia , and 15-80 % of hallucinogen users may experience these flashbacks . micropsia can also be a rare side effect of zolpidem , a prescription medication used to temporarily treat insomnia . . psychological factors . psychiatric patients may experience micropsia in an attempt to distance themselves from situations involving conflict . micropsia may also be a symptom of psychological conditions in which patients visualize people as small objects as a way to control others in response to their insecurities and feelings of weakness . in some adults who experienced loneliness as children , micropsia may arise as a mirror of prior feelings of separation from people and objects . . epstein-barr virus infection . micropsia can be caused by swelling of the cornea due to infection by the epstein-barr virus ( ebv ) and can therefore present as an initial symptom of ebv mononucleosis , a disease caused by epstein-barr virus infection . retinal edema . after surgery , patients may experience micropsia as a result of larger photoreceptor separation by edematous fluid . . macular degeneration . macular degeneration typically produces micropsia due to the swelling or bulging of the macula , an oval-shaped yellow spot near the center of the retina in the human eye . the main factors leading to this disease are age , smoking , heredity , and obesity . some studies show that consuming spinach or collard greens five times a week cuts the risk of macular degeneration by 43 % . . central serous chorioretinopathy . cscr is a disease in which a serous detachment of the neurosensory retina occurs over an area of leakage from the choriocapillaris through the retinal pigment epithelium ( rpe ) . the most common symptoms that result from the disease are a deterioration of visual acuity and micropsia . . brain lesions . micropsia is sometimes seen in individuals with brain infarctions . the damaged side of the brain conveys size information that contradicts the size information conveyed by the other side of the brain . this causes a contradiction to arise between the true perception of an object 's size and the smaller perception of the object , and micropsic bias ultimately causes the individual to experience micropsia . lesions affecting other parts of the extracerebral visual pathways can also cause micropsia . . treatment . treatment varies for micropsia due to the large number of different causes for the condition . treatments involving the occlusion of one eye and the use of a prism fitted over an eyeglass lens have both been shown to provide relief from micropsia . micropsia that is induced by macular degeneration can be treated in several ways . a study called areds ( age-related eye disease study ) determined that taking dietary supplements containing high-dose antioxidants and zinc produced significant benefits with regard to disease progression . this study was the first ever to prove that dietary supplements can alter the natural progression and complications of a disease state . laser treatments also look promising but are still in clinical stages . . epidemiology . episodes of micropsia or macropsia occur in 9 % of adolescents . 10-35 % of migraine sufferers experience auras , with 88 % of these patients experiencing both visual auras ( which include micropsia ) and neurological auras . headache and the eye micropsia seems to be slightly more common in boys than in girls among children who experience migraines . approximately 80 % of temporal lobe seizures produce auras that may lead to micropsia or macropsia . they are a common feature of simple partial seizures and usually precede complex partial seizures of temporal lobe origin . central serous chorioretinopathy ( cscr ) which can produce micropsia predominantly affects persons between the ages of 20 and 50 . women appear to be affected more than men by a factor of almost 3 to 1 . . society and culture . comparison with alice 's adventures in wonderland . alice in wonderland syndrome , a neurological condition associated with both micropsia and macropsia , is named after lewis carroll 's famous 19th century novel alice 's adventures in wonderland . in the story , the title character , alice , experiences numerous situations similar to those of micropsia and macropsia . speculation has arisen that carroll may have written the story using his own direct experience with episodes of micropsia resulting from the numerous migraines he was known to suffer from . it has also been suggested that carroll may have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy . comparison with gulliver 's travels . micropsia has also been related to jonathan swift novel gulliver 's travels . it has been referred to as '' lilliput sight '' and '' lilliputian hallucination , '' a term coined by british physician raoul leroy in 1909 , based on the small people that inhabited the island of lilliput in the novel . top 10 : weirdest diseases you 've never heard of . research . current experimental evidence focuses on the involvement of the occipitotemporal pathway in both the perceptual equivalence of objects across translations of retinal position and also across size modifications . recent evidence points to this pathway as a mediator for an individual 's perception of size . even further , numerous cases suggest that size perception may be dissociated from other aspects of visual perception such as color and movement . however , more research is called for to correctly relate the condition to defined physiological conditions . current research is being done on macular degeneration which could help prevent cases of micropsia . a variety of drugs that block vascular endothelial growth factors ( vegfs ) are being evaluated as a treatment option . these treatments for the first time have produced actual improvements in vision , rather than simply delaying or arresting the continued loss of vision characteristic of macular degeneration . a number of surgical treatments are also being investigated for macular degeneration lesions that may not qualify for laser treatment , including macular translocation to a healthier area of the eye , displacement of submacular blood using gas , and removing membranes by surgery .