Think Global

history . the company was founded in january 1991 in oslo , as pivco ( for personal independent vehicle company ) . the first practical prototype , the piv2 , like the vehicles that followed , were built around a chassis made of aluminum and carrying a body made of polyethylene thermoplastic rotomolded in one piece . the chassis were developed by hydro aluminium tonder in tønder in denmark and were one of the main reasons that ford later acquired 51 % of the stock . 10 of 15 prototypes were built in time for the lillehammer olympic winter games in 1994 . the battery technology was nicd , driving a three-phase ac induction motor via the front wheels . the piv2 was followed by the piv3 , the city bee ( citi in the us ) , introduced in 1995 . 120 of these were produced , 40 of which participated in the san francisco bay area city car demonstration project from 1995 to 1998 . based on the experiences from the prototypes , pivco then went on to develop their first true production model , piv4 , later called the th ! nk , with lotus cars in a consulting role . the basic construction concept from the prototypes was retained , except that the roof was made of abs plastic , and the lower frame chassis elements were made of steel . the production model had a range of ( modified ece101 cycle ) between charges , and a top speed of . development took more time and resources than anticipated , so when development of the production model was finished in 1999 , finances had dried up . the company was then acquired by ford , who could start production of the th ! nk city . ford even embraced the th ! nk concept , and marketed electrically driven bicycles as well as golf carts under the same brand . the th ! nk city electric vehicle ( ev ) demonstration program project was initiated late 2001 , and completed in april 2005 . us . partners include federal , state and municipal agencies as well as commercial partners . phase i , consisted of placement of the vehicles in demonstration programs , and it was completed in 2002 . phase ii , the monitoring of these programs was completed in 2004 . phase iii , the decommissioning and/or exporting of vehicles concluded in 2005 . phase i - the program successfully assigned 192 ev 's with customers ( including hertz ) in the state of california , 109 in new york ( including loaner and demo vehicles ) , 16 in georgia , 7 to customers outside of the us and 52 in ford 's internal operations in dearborn , michigan for a total of 376 vehicles . phase ii – the monitoring of the operational fleet was ongoing and completed in 2004 , and all vehicles were returned throughout 2004 and 2005 . the department of energy ( doe ) was involved with the monitoring of the new york power authority / th ! nk clean commute program units through partnership with ecotality ( etec ) , which filed separate reports to doe . the remainder of the field fleet was monitored through ford 's internal operations . vehicles were retired from lease operation throughout the program for various operator reasons . some of the vehicles were involved in re-leasing operations . at the end of the program , 376 vehicles had been involved , 372 of which were available for customer use while 4 were engineering prototype and study vehicles . at the end of leases , city vehicles have been decommissioned and/or exported to kamkorp in norway . by april 2005 , the last of the city vehicles had been returned and processed or exported to norway . production ceased in 2002 , after 1,005 units had been made . many of these cars participated in station car projects in california and in new york city . probably due to changes in the california zero-emissions vehicle policy , ford gave up think on january 31 , 2003 . the company was sold to kamkorp , owned by indian businessman kamal siddiqi . development of a successor to the city was subsequently halted . the used cars from us and uk have been re-exported greenpeace.org th ! nk again : ford does a u-turn to norway where they are in high demand due to the government 's policy to promote the use of electrical cars ( evs are exempt from taxes , have free parking , pass toll roads for free , and are allowed to drive in the bus lanes avoiding traffic congestion ) . in 2004 , the company turned its attention to development of the th ! nk public , a micro size electric bus to be rented to customers for inner city travel . by february 2006 , prototypes of the vehicle had been developed , but the company went into receivership . at the end of march 2006 , think nordic was acquired by norwegian investment group inspire , which includes the original founder jan otto ringdal and jan-olaf willums - a norwegian engineer educated at the renowned eth zurich ( swiss federal polytechnic ) and expert in corporate social responsibility ( csr ) - as partners . the company was renamed think global . for the next year , the think website showed a restyled '' new think city '' car which was under development . an open version of the car was also pictured but the company said it had no plans to put it into production . in march 2007 , a completely new website was posted , with many more images of the new car rendered into artist 's impressions and various exterior/interior photographs . this site is presented in norwegian and english . the original english page reported : '' the think city has abs brakes , dual airbags , and meets all european and us safety requirements . it has a range of , a top speed of and has comfort and convenience features such as air conditioning , power steering , sun roof , electric windows and mirrors , and more '' . in may 2007 , tesla motors , maker of the electric tesla roadster , announced an agreement to sell 43 million dollars worth of its li-ion battery systems to think nordic for use in the next generation think city , teslamotors.com introducing tesla energy group latimes.com tesla to supply batteries for electric cars but on 2 november 2007 it backed out of the deal . the think assembly line was restarted in late november 2007 to start manufacturing the re-designed city car . on march 5 , 2008 , general electric , battery manufacturer a123 systems and think global announced that they had entered a partnership to enable global electrification of transportation . ge invested in think and 20 million in a123 systems to help a123 roll out batteries for think . a123 systems and think at the same time signed a commercial supply agreement . the partnership was announced at the 78th annual international geneva motor show . also at the 2008 geneva motor show , think unveiled its future five-seater , concept car , the th ! nk o x . think o x in july 2008 , think introduced the think city for the first time in the uk . as of august 2008 , some 100 city cars had been manufactured for customers in norway . it was reported that '' the lean plant is ready for efficient production supported by the experts of porsche consulting '' . green wombat on december 15 , 2008 , think suspended all vehicle production and laid off 50 % of its staff pending negotiation of up to 29 million in funding for working capital , citing '' urgent financial distress . '' as of january 13 , 2009 , think global received a bridge loan of 40 million norwegian kroner ( ~ 5.69 million ) to continue operation . much of that bridge loan came from one of its battery suppliers , enerdel . on august 27 , 2009 , think announced a successful recapitalization ( 47 million ) through existing and new investors , which allowed the company to exit court protection and resume normal business operations in terms of manufacturing and sales of the think city ev in europe . announced investors included battery manufacturer ener1 in u.s . ( 31 % ) ; us venture capital firms rockport capital partners ( boston ) ; element partners ( philadelphia ) and kleiner perkins ( palo alto , ca ) as well as valmet automotive based in finland and investinor ( the venture capital sovereign fund of norway ) . on the same day , the company also announced that the think city electric car would be produced in valmet later that year . the deal also included engineering . valmet invested around ( 4.27 million ) to the project , and became a minor shareholder of the company . production of the think city car at valmet automotive started on december 10 , 2009 in uusikaupunki , finland . on january 5 , 2010 think announced plans to manufacture the think city in elkhart , indiana beginning in 2011 . on april 6 , 2010 think announced plans to begin selling the think city in the u.s . in 2010 . december 2010 , the first 15 think electric cars made in the elkhart , indiana , assembly plant were delivered to its customer – the state of indiana – for government fleet use . this marks the first time that an american-made electric vehicle with lithium-ion battery has been purchased for u.s . fleet operation . the vehicles delivered were the think city model , which is a pure electric vehicle that produces zero emissions and is capable of traveling as far as on a single charge . “ our delivery today is part of a larger effort to help transform the u.s . light-duty vehicle fleet from one that is mostly dependent on imported oil , to one that is fueled entirely by domestically produced electric energy , ” said barry engle , think ceo . engle continued , “ as part of that goal , we ’ ve made a strategic decision to target initially the many millions of fleet vehicles in operation in the u.s . market…these fleets can jumpstart vehicle electrification in america ’ s cities and help push the industry past early adopters into mainstream consumer markets . ” production of the th ! nk city was stopped in march 2011 and the company filed for bankruptcy on june 22 , 2011 , for the fourth time in 20 years . think global 's assets were bought by electric mobility solutions as in july 2011 , including shares of wholly owned subsidiaries think north america and think uk . the new owners announced that production is scheduled to restart in early 2012 with a refined think city . however , despite such announcements production ceased in august 2012 . in january 2013 , an email sent to existing think city customer included the sentence '' for 2013 , our focus is on serving our customers , while developing the next model think ev . '' thus hinting that another think ev is in development . models . th ! nk city . the th ! nk city was a small two-seater or 2+2-seater highway capable electric car , with a top speed of and an in-town range of on a full charge . the think city is available with either a zebra sodium ( molten salt battery ) battery or a lithium-ion battery , which both travel 100 miles , or 160 kilometres on a full charge , and based on the international electrotechnical commission 's standards for electric cars . after a failed start up in norway in 2008 , mass production was restarted in finland in december 2009 . as of september 2010 the th ! nk city was sold in norway , the netherlands , spain , france , austria , switzerland and finland . it was one of the first three electric cars in the world to be crash-tested and highway-certified , together with the tesla roadster ( 2008 ) and the mitsubishi i miev . th ! nk ox . thumb the th ! nk ox , presented at the 2008 geneva motor show , was a concept five-seater electric car with a top speed of and a 100 & nbsp ; kw motor . the website for the think ox , now shut down , listed the top speed as 135 & nbsp ; km/h ( ~84 & nbsp ; mi/h ) and the range as 250 & nbsp ; km ( ~155 & nbsp ; mi ) . th ! nk open . th ! nk open was a 3-door , 2-seat concept car , where the roof has been removed . top speed is , with the following ranges ( 90 to 203 & nbsp ; km ) : range iec ( european standard for calculating range of electrical cars ) : 170 & nbsp ; km ( summer tires , heater off ) range fuds ( american standard for calculating range of electrical cars ) : 180 & nbsp ; km ( summer tires , heater off ) range fuds winter ( typical range in particularly cold conditions ) : 90 & nbsp ; km /winter tires , constant 4 & nbsp ; kw heater range eu udc ( range during city driving only ) :