John Smith (Labour Party leader)

early life . smith was born at baddarroch , dalmally , argyll , the eldest of three children of sarah cameron , née scott ( 29 july 1910 – 11 january 1997 ) , and archibald leitch smith ( 18 june 1907 – 1981 ) . at the time of smith 's birth , his father was schoolmaster at portnahaven , islay ; however , two years later he became the headmaster of the primary school at ardrishaig , argyll , which smith went on to attend . from september 1952 , smith attended dunoon grammar school , lodging in the town with a landlady and going home during the school holidays , before enrolling at the university of glasgow . he studied history from 1956 to 1959 , and then law , from 1959 to 1962 . he joined the labour party in 1955 . smith became involved in debate with the glasgow university dialectic society and the glasgow university union : in 1962 , he won the observer mace debating competition , speaking with gordon hunter . in 1995 , after his death , the competition was renamed the john smith memorial mace in his honour . in 1963 , he became a solicitor and then in 1967 , an advocate at the scottish bar , supplementing his income by working as a defamation for the daily record and the sunday mail . . member of parliament . smith first stood as a labour parliamentary candidate aged 23 at a by-election in 1961 in the east fife constituency ; he contested that seat again in the 1964 general election . as it was a safe seat for the unionist party ( who at the time ran in place of the conservatives ) , smith came second by some distance on both occasions . at the 1970 general election , he was elected as member of parliament ( mp ) for north lanarkshire , succeeding peggy herbison . mark stuart , john smith : a life ( london : politico 's , 2005 ) , p . 63 . smith made his maiden speech on 10 november 1970 , opposing the conservative government 's family income supplement . stuart , p . 63 . on 28 october 1971 , smith defied the labour whips in joining labour mps led by roy jenkins to vote in favour of entry to the european economic community . stuart , p . 64 . these included roy hattersley , shirley williams , bill rodgers and david owen , all of whom he was later to sit with in the callaghan cabinet . in government . in february 1974 smith declined harold wilson 's offer of the office of solicitor general for scotland , not wishing his political career to become sidelined as a law officer . stuart , pp . 68–69 . in october , he was made an under-secretary of state at the department of energy . stuart , p . 69 . in december 1975 , he was made a minister of state . stuart , p . 71 . smith supported james callaghan in the labour party leadership election after wilson resigned in april 1976 . stuart , p . 78 . when callaghan became prime minister , smith became a minister of state at the privy council office , serving with labour 's deputy leader , michael foot , the lord president of the council and leader of the house of commons . stuart , p . 79 . in this position , smith piloted the highly controversial devolution proposals for scotland and wales through the house of commons . stuart , p . 81 . smith 's adroit handling of these proposals impressed callaghan , and in november 1978 , when edmund dell retired , callaghan appointed smith secretary of state for trade . stuart , p . 95 . in this post , smith was the youngest member of the cabinet , and served there until the 1979 general election . shadow cabinet . smith was voted to the shadow cabinet in the elections of june 1979 and would be re-elected every year until 1992 . stuart , p . 115 . smith became shadow energy secretary . in the labour leadership election of november 1980 , smith voted for denis healey over michael foot . smith remained in the labour party after figures on the right of the party formed the breakaway social democratic party , remarking : '' i am comfortable with the unions . they are n't . that 's the big difference '' . stuart , p . 116 . smith voted for healey in the deputy leadership election of september 1981 . stuart , p . 119 . he became a qc in 1983 , the same year that his constituency became monklands east . during the 1983 general election , smith concentrated on unemployment , arguing that the conservatives had caused deindustrialisation and that a labour government would increase investment , and therefore employment . stuart , p . 121 . smith received over 50 per cent of the vote in monklands east , but labour lost badly nationally . smith then acted as roy hattersley 's campaign manager in the leadership election and the deputy leadership election . stuart , p . 122 . after serving a year as shadow employment secretary , smith was secretary of state for trade and industry between late 1984 and 1987 . shadow chancellor of the exchequer . smith was appointed shadow chancellor by neil kinnock in july 1987 after the labour party 's general election defeat . stuart , p . 143 . despite a quiet , modest manner and his politically moderate stance , he was a witty , often scathing speaker . smith was named as parliamentarian of the year twice : first in november 1986 for his performances during the westland affair during which leon brittan resigned , and the second time in november 1989 for taking nigel lawson to task over the state of the economy and over his difficult relationship with sir alan walters , the prime minister 's economic adviser . stuart , pp . 138–139 , 161 . smith made two notably witty attacks on lawson that year . on 7 june 1989 , he sang the theme tune for the soap neighbours at the dispatch box , lampooning the differences between lawson and walters , who was critical of lawson 's policies but whom thatcher refused to sack . stuart , p . 159 . then , on 24 october , he made another scathing attack on the differences . stuart , p . 160 . two days later , lawson resigned , followed shortly afterwards by walters . first heart attack . smith suffered a heart attack on 9 october 1988 , and was forced to spend three months away from westminster to recover . on that occasion , he had complained of chest pains the night before and had to be persuaded to cancel a flight to london so he could go to hospital for a check-up . he was examined at the edinburgh royal infirmary by an ecg . the doctor who examined him said , '' whatever it is , we do n't think it is your heart '' . then , smith suddenly collapsed and was briefly unconscious before coming around . he spent three days in intensive care before leaving hospital on 20 october 1988 and made a full recovery . smith made modifications to his lifestyle by going on a diet of 1,000 calories , cutting down on rich foods and fine wines , giving up smoking and taking up munro bagging . by the time of his death , he had succeeded in climbing 108 of the 277 scottish munros ( mountains over 3,000 feet above sea level at the summit ) . his weight dropped from at the time of the first heart attack , to when he returned to parliament on 23 january 1989 . leader of the opposition . following labour 's fourth consecutive defeat at the general election of april 1992 , neil kinnock resigned as leader and smith was elected labour leader . stuart , p . 236 . although labour had now been out of power for 13 years , their performance in the 1992 election had been much better than in the previous three . they had cut the conservative majority from 102 seats to 21 , and for most of the three years leading up to the election , opinion polls had indicated that labour were more likely to win the election than the conservatives . the resignation of long-serving but increasingly unpopular conservative prime minister margaret thatcher , and the well-received election of john major as her successor , had seen the comfortable labour lead in the opinion polls wiped out and in the 17 months leading up to the election , its outcome had become much harder to predict . much of the blame had been placed on labour 's '' shadow budget '' drawn up by smith , which included raising the top rate of income tax from 40p in the pound to 50p , and the conservative election campaign was centred on warning voters that they would face higher taxes under a labour government . in september 1992 , smith made his maiden speech as party leader , in which he attacked the government 's erm debacle eight days earlier – an event which was seen by many observers as playing a large part in determining the outcome of the next general election , long before it was even on the political horizon , as from that point onwards the labour party was ascendant in the opinion polls , winning several seats from the conservatives in by-elections ( eventually even attracting a conservative mp to defect to labour ) and trouncing them in local council elections . in this speech , he referred to john major as '' the devalued prime minister of a devalued government '' . stuart , p . 259 . at labour 's party conference , smith branded major and norman lamont the '' laurel and hardy of british politics '' . this echoed his attacks on major 's government made before the 1992 election ( while he was still shadow chancellor ) , most memorably when he labelled '' irresponsible '' conservative plans for cutting income tax to 20 per cent , and joked at a labour party rally in sheffield that the conservatives would have a box-office disaster with '' honey , i shrunk the economy '' – in reference to the recent disney motion picture honey , i shrunk the kids – mocking the recession which was plaguing the british economy at the time . in a june 1993 debate , smith again savaged the conservative government , saying that under john major 's premiership , '' the man with the non-midas touch is in charge . it is no wonder that we live in a country where the grand national does not start and hotels fall into the sea '' ( in reference to the 1993 grand national , which was cancelled after a false start , and to holbeck hall hotel in scarborough , which had recently collapsed off a cliff ) . stuart , pp . 260–261 . during the same debate , smith commented on a recent government defeat in the newbury by-election to the liberal democrats , a poor showing in the local elections and a subsequent cabinet reshuffle by saying that '' if we were to offer that tale of events to the bbc light entertainment department as a script for a programme , i think that the producers of yes minister would have turned it down as hopelessly over the top . it might have even been too much for some mothers do 'ave 'em '' . stuart , p . 260 . in the same speech , smith also attacked the conservatives ' broken election promises ( in particular lamont 's recent budget decision to impose vat on domestic energy bills ) – claiming he possessed the last copy of a 1992 policy document '' to escape the central office shredder '' . he also performed very well in the july 1993 motion of confidence debate on the conservative government . despite his dispatch box successes ( smith was always more effective in the house of commons than on platforms or at prime minister 's questions , though he began to improve at the latter towards the end of his life ) , tony blair and gordon brown were , under smith 's leadership , restless and privately anxious that the party had adopted a '' one more heave '' approach and had become over-cautious in tackling the legacy of '' tax and spend '' . stuart , pp . 289–290 . despite this , during his time as leader of the labour party , smith abolished the trade union block vote at labour party conference and replaced it with '' one member , one vote '' at the 1993 party conference . stuart , pp . 334–335 . he also committed a future labour government to establishing a scottish parliament , an aim fulfilled by his successors after his death ( most notably his close friend donald dewar ) . smith was also a committed british unionist . during smith 's tenure as leader the labour party gained a significant lead in the polls over the conservatives ; on 5 may 1994 , one week before smith 's death , the conservatives suffered a major defeat in the british council elections , their worst in over 30 years . this happened in spite of the strong economic recovery and reduction of unemployment which had followed the declaration of the recession 's end in april 1993 . labour 's opinion poll lead was shown to be as high as 23 per cent in may 1994 . death . on the evening of 11 may 1994 , with around 500 people present , smith made a speech at a fundraising dinner at park lane hotel , london , saying '' the opportunity to serve our country—that is all we ask '' . stuart , p . 2 . at 8:05 & nbsp ; a.m . the following morning , whilst in his barbican flat , smith suffered a fatal heart attack . his wife phoned an ambulance and he was taken to st bartholomew 's hospital where he died at 9:15 & nbsp ; a.m . , having never regained consciousness . on 28 april , a fortnight before his death , smith had visited the same accident and emergency department to campaign against its proposed closure . the doctor who had served as his tour guide , professor mike besser , tried unsuccessfully to save smith 's life . in response to his death , john major paid tribute in the house of commons to smith , culminating in the now well-known line that he and smith '' would share a drink : sometimes tea , sometimes not tea '' . it was reported that there was weeping in the chamber . on the day of his death , the bbc 9 o'clock news was extended to an hour as opposed to the usual half-hour . this replaced the medical drama which was due to follow at 9:30 , coincidentally entitled cardiac arrest . during question time that evening , panellists paid tribute to smith instead of debating . george robertson and menzies campbell were among the participants . on 20 may 1994 , after a public funeral service in cluny parish church , edinburgh , which was attended by almost 1,000 people , smith was buried in a private family service on the island of iona , at the sacred burial ground of reilig odhráin , where many early scottish and norse kings are said to be buried . his grave is marked with an epitaph quoting the fourth epistle of an essay on man by alexander pope : '' an honest man 's the noblest work of god '' . walk of the month : the island of iona the independent 4 june 2006 . his close friend donald dewar acted as one of smith 's pallbearers . on 14 july 1994 , a memorial service for smith took place at westminster abbey and was attended by over 2,000 people . the archbishop of canterbury george carey gave an address . aftermath in the labour party . following smith 's death , the labour party renamed its a215 road headquarters john smith house in his memory . tony blair , smith 's successor as leader of the labour party , was an effective campaigner who capitalised on public mistrust of the conservative party to win a landslide victory at the 1997 general election . smith 's biographer , mark stuart , claimed that smith could have won labour a victory on a scale similar to that achieved by blair because of the combination of the black wednesday debacle and internal conservative party divisions over europe since 1992 . stuart argues that the lack of a '' blair effect '' would have meant that the conservative party would have held slightly over 200 seats ( rather than the 165 it actually won ) in the house of commons , leaving the conservatives in a position similar to that of labour after the 1983 general election . stuart , m . , in brack , d . , and i . dale ( editors ) ( 2003 ) prime minister portillo and other things that never happened , politico 's publishing . . personal life . smith was married to elizabeth bennett from 5 july 1967 until his death . elizabeth smith was created baroness smith of gilmorehill in 1995 . they had three daughters , one of whom , sarah smith , has served as the washington correspondent for channel 4 news and has worked for the bbc since 2014 . their other daughters are jane , a costume designer , and catherine , a lawyer . . references . further reading . . external links . ( mixed with the welsh politician with the same name . ) - - - - - - - - -