Group entity

description . in the anarchist discourse , groups are seen often as akin to asexual beings , reproducing by copying ( e.g . cloning , copying legal boilerplate charters and constitutions ) rather than by sharing . groups are also uninterested in interaction other than consumption ( often consuming each other in misnamed 'mergers ' ) . group relations are described as limited to 'eat-or-be-eaten ' , in contrast to individuals who ( do also eat but ) can engage in more complex types of interaction with the more complex cognition that sexual reproduction and social living require . the ability to sexually reproduce , in other words , is the main ontological distinction between a genuine being and faux or pretend entities that can not share interests nor sympathize with sexually reproducing beings . an unbridgeable cognitive gap is assumed to exist between things that make more of themselves by meeting , sharing , mating and protecting offspring , and things that make more of themselves by simply consuming and then splitting off their successor entities . biology makes similar distinctions but only sociobiology and the autopoietic approach to biology generally assume , as most anarchists do , that the origin or type of being decisively determines its cognition and limits its ability to empathize or agree . political implications of assuming reproduction style frames cognition and cooperation are profound and have immediate legal and political implications . stricter individualist anarchists generally deny the assertion that corporations , for instance , are fundamentally different from trade unions or political party or religious institutions or even non-governmental organizations . all such entities are seen as self-interested and interested only in their own propagation - their relation to individuals is predatory , parasitic , and only rarely symbiotic . even if those individuals perceive those groups as serving their own interests , the anarchist argues , they are actually accepting a proxy for those interests . in particular the distinction is important for sexual interests , which are the most obvious interests that group-entities can not have , having no sexual feelings , and able to deal in sex only as a commodity not as a direct organismic interest , e.g . a dating game show which is motivated to indulge sexual interest but only to sell advertising , thus distorting the mating process to serve commerce . a response to this argument is that groups also do not feel hunger , but can act as a means for individuals to satisfy their hunger - this being the main motive for the corporation and collective economic effort , back to earliest systems of irrigation . bob black argued that it was not feelings or intentions or urges but the actual model of collaboration that distincted the group-entity . the sexual individual animal can conceive ( pun intended ) of seduction , dance , flirtation , and other means of cooperation that do not involve one entity consuming and destroying the identity of the other . group-entities have no such skills nor capacities - they interact with each other in a way reminiscent of predation , where the predator will consume and destroy the identity of the prey , which no longer reproduces but contributes to the predator 's energy . corporate mergers , for instance , are often presented as relationships of equals cooperating , but in fact usually one executive group or the other will be drastically reduced , the organizational structure and ethics of one of the two being obliterated . corporations do not get each other pregnant , nor do they nurture child corporations - joint ventures being a notable exception . as noted above , some anarchists employ arguments reminiscent of sociobiology and relate the behavior of other animals to those of humans - including that of animal groups . they may rely on observations from ecology and biology . for example , in a fish school , the fish have certain habits that make the school a cohesive group-entity , and which they perceive protect them from predators . but it may also be true that the school itself acts to attract predators , prevent creative or evasive actions , and acts with some collective intelligence to cut out its weaker members - none of which necessarily benefits the individual fish obeying 'school rules ' . much of anarchist discourse consists of comparing human behavior to that of other pack or social animals , and focuses on the 'collective stupidity ' such habits imply - also known in psychology as groupthink . john zerzan considers even ideas of '' number '' to reflect such a groupthink . some , possibly following jonathan swift , argue that humans are the stupidity of hominids when massed socially , no better than domestic animals bred for either chaos or slavery , and have thus lost much of their capacity to solve ecological or social problems with creativity . war , fundamentalist religion and pathological consumption are often seen as mere symptoms of this . these phenomena are sometimes presented as arguments against civilization itself as a process . certainly gulliver 's travels presents cogent arguments of this sort . the theory of eco-anarchism focuses on reducing reliance on group-entities specifically to reactivate creativity , and strengthen inter-generational ties as an alternative to same-generation peer-groups ( seen as prone to peer pressure ) or 'school ' . daniel quinn 's book ishmael presents a positive vision of tribalism and great ape personhood ( the book being structured as a conversation between man and ape ) is an influential work of this sort . an interesting question is whether a family which exists primarily or only to provide economic , infrastructural , instructional and emotional support to specific individuals who are related , is a group-entity distinct from feelings or methods of individual sexual animals . families unlike the more economic or political entities focused on the outside world , do seem sometimes to merge or alter themselves so as to relate effectively in ways analogous to individuals ' - indeed , a traditional family is formed by exactly such a 'dance ' between two such individuals . positive notions of tribe would seem to flow from kin or clan relationships , as studied in cultural anthropology and seemingly universal in not only human but also great ape societies . lewis thomas noted in lives of a cell , 1975 , that people deprived of traditional life-ways could often behave in ways reminiscent of the sociopathic and predatory ways that nation-states interact , e.g . in zero-sum games . the iks , a people he used as example , were not longer able to hunt and pursue their forest lifestyle , and when forced to become farmers were reduced to playing cruel practical jokes on each other , revelling in each other 's errors and misfortunes , and squabbling in ways that reminded thomas of the united nations , i.e . not very united at all , and not reflective of a real 'society ' . accordingly , nationalism and the interaction between nation-states ( or the political party that control them ) might be the most appropriate or least controversial application of the theory of group-entities being malignant or inherently competitive and unable to cooperate for common benefit . see prisoner 's dilemma and the work of robert axelrod for another view of how even self-interested entities can cooperate , which tends to moderate the individualist view . more moderate eco-anarchist view : ecological alignment can tame group entities . application of the theory of inherently competitive group-entities below that level is questionable to the degree that the group or the entity does have some biological identity , e.g . an ecoregion , a species , a food chain , the carbon cycle of the atmosphere , the water cycle of a watershed . such bases for organization would seem , like that of the kin , clan , or family , to align biological and group interests , and therefore overcome the objections that group and individual entities have nothing in common . accordingly , eco-anarchism and the looser green anarchisms , and related theories in green economics such as that of trustee stewardship of the commons , are more likely to perceive group-entity actions as benign if the group entity itself has a biological or ecological parameter , mission or scope . for instance , watersheds as borders , or a migration corridors as a right of way , could align the interests of the biological creatures that rely on these to the group-entities that succeed via effective management of them . several specific proposals to do this are extant today : the theory of bioregional democracy relates political party and watershed and other ecological border and management problems explicitly , as one solution to the group-entity interest problem . peter barnes 's capitalism 3.0 advances an economic theory in which explicit trustees of public commons would take their place alongside the public sector and private sector as a '' third commons sector '' . such commons would include not only oceans , biodiversity and natural capital but also the instructional capital required to maintain them - including wikipedia or other open content resources that educated trustees , executives , and the citizenry . see also . civics entity family resemblance green anarchism hive mind