Chapultepec

history . according to studies , there has been human presence in the area since at least the pre-classic period . the first identified culture archaeologists have evidence for is the toltecs . the toltecs named the area '' grasshopper hill '' , which would later become nahuatl '' chapoltepēc '' ( '' at the grasshopper hill '' ) . remains of a toltec altar have been found on the hill 's summit . in the classic period , the area was occupied by people of the teotihuacan culture . when the mexicans , or aztecs arrived in the valley of mexico , it was inhabited by a people called the tepanecas of azcapotzalco . when the aztecs took over the valley of mexico , they considered the hill as both a sacred and strategic site . they began to use the area as a repository for the ashes of their rulers , and the area 's springs became an important source of fresh water for the capital of tenochtitlan . eventually , the area became a retreat strictly limited to the ruling and religious elite . in the 1420s , ruler nezahualcoyotl was the first to build a palace in the area . moctezuma ii built reservoirs to raise exotic fish and to store water . he also had trees and plants from various parts of the aztec empire planted here . in 1465 , moctezuma i ordered his portrait carved into a rock at the foot of the hill and constructed the tlaxpana aqueduct , which measured three km . during the spanish conquest of the aztec empire , one of the last battles between the spanish and ruler cuauhtémoc occurred at chapultepec hill in 1521 . shortly thereafter , the franciscans built a small hermitage over the indigenous altar on chapultepec hill . hernán cortés appropriated chapultepec and granted the northern portion to captain juan jaramillo , who would become the husband of la malinche . however , in 1530 , charles v decreed the area as the property of the mexico city and open to it to the public . the spanish continued to use the aztec aqueduct , but in 1771 , another one was deemed necessary for the growing population of mexico city . the chapultepec aqueduct led water from the springs of the forest to an area in what was the south of the city , called salto del agua . it flowed over 904 arches and 3,908 meters . in 1785 , the franciscan hermitage was demolished to make way for the chapultepec castle , converting the hill and the forest around it into a summer retreat for colonial viceroys . the area was walled off from the general public and was the scene of elegant parties . after mexico achieved independence in 1821 , the castle became the official residence of the head of state . a number of these , especially emperor maximilian i and his wife , embellished and expanded the castle as well as the forest area around it . the hill was also the site of the battle of chapultepec in 1847 , between mexican and u.s . troops led by general winfield scott . a band of cadets was at the castle when it was attacked , and near the end of the battle , six of them decided to jump to their deaths from the castle on the hill to the rocks below . these six are referred to as the '' niños héroes '' and are honored by a monument near where their bodies fell . the castle remained the official residence of mexican presidents until 1940 , when this function was moved to the los pinos residence , and the castle was converted into a museum . since then , the park has been expanded twice , adding the second section in 1964 and the third section ten years later . since then , the focus has been on the maintenance of the area . by 1998 , the paths of the park , especially in the first section , were saturated with over 3,000 peddlers with few regulations or norms . in 2005 , the first section of the park was closed for renovations , effectively evicting all vendors from the area . when it reopened months later , permits for selling were strictly limited , and police began to crack down on vendors in the park . however , some vendors continue to operate illegally and exchange information on the police 's steps with radio communication equipment . at the entrances to the park , where the vendor restrictions are not in place , some vendors sometimes block the entrances and cover signs so that visitors are forced to pass through their stands . maintenance issues have closed parts of the park from time to time . in 1985 , the park was closed to exterminate rats and other pests . in 2005 , the park was filled with trees in poor condition , had scum in the lakes , and had trash piles in several locations , including fountains . from that year until 2010 , the park was closed section by section for restoration and rehabilitation projects . the first section was closed for eight months in 2005 , for work that included dredging lakes , pruning and removing trees , picking up tons of debris , and expelling hundreds of vendors . shortly thereafter , projects on the second and third sections of the park began , mostly to control or eliminate rats , feral dogs and cats , pigeons , and other introduced species . in 2005 , migratory birds began to make a comeback at the park with the eradication and relocation of introduced species such as geese and ducks , which were aggressive to other species . the park hosts more than 100 species of this kind of bird , with some reproducing here for the first time in decades . other native mammals returned in 2005 , including the virginia opossum and the cacomistle . in 2010 , projects included renovating jogging tracks , and planting more than 800 trees , including acacia café , pino azul , pino peñonero , holm oak , pino moctezuma , pino prieto and grevilia , as well as the removal of dead or severely infected trees . these rehabilitation efforts of the 2000s were funded by a combination of government and private funds from groups like probosque . . characteristics . chapultepec park is the second largest city park in latin america , after the santiago metropolitan park in chile , measuring in total just over 686 hectares ( 1700 acres ) . it is classed as one of the world 's largest and most visited urban parks , along with bois de boulogne in paris , the imperial gardens in tokyo , and central park in new york city . the name '' chapultepec '' means '' at the grasshopper hill '' in nahuatl and refers to a large rock formation that is the center of the park 's first section . originally , this area was a forest outside of tenochtitlan , once considered sacred in pre-columbian times , but today it is entirely within the city ( mostly in the borough of miguel hidalgo ) , surrounded by some of its primary business and commercial districts . the park is divided into three sections , the first and oldest surrounded by fencing and closed at night , with the other two left open . it contains nine museums , amusement parks , winding paths , commemorative sculptures , lakes and fountains . paseo de la reforma passes most of the park and cuts through a portion on the north side . one of the park 's main functions is to be an ecological space for greater mexico city . it is considered the first and most important of mexico city 's '' lungs '' , with trees that replenished oxygen to the valley of mexico . it is a large unpaved area that allows for aquifer recharge , ameliorates the '' heat-island '' effect , and attracts rain . it is a refuge for migratory birds from canada , the u.s . and other regions of mexico , including the cooper hawk , the harris 's hawk , wild ducks , and vireos , warblers and kingfishers . anywhere from 20 to 60 species of birds can be found here during one morning birding , including some native non-migratory species such as the berylline hummingbird , lesser goldfinch , house finch , rufous-backed robin , black-backed oriole , cinnamon-bellied flowerpiercer and breeding colonies of great egret and black-crowned night heron there are also more than a dozen species of reptiles and amphibians , and a number of species of various types that are in danger of extinction , including the axolotl , goodeidae , alandrias . the park is home to a large number of montezuma cypress , locally called '' ahuehuete '' trees , with some hundreds of years old . many of them were planted by the aztecs . there are also 165 other species , mostly in the third section . it is estimated by city authorities that mxn 100 million are needed annually to maintain the ecology of the park . for mexico city residents , the park is valued as a cultural and historic area as well as green space . the area has vestiges showing human presence as far back as the toltecs with a number ruins from the pre-columbian through to the colonial period . archeological studies have unearthed and identified tombs associated with teotihuacan , a toltec altar on the summit of chapultepec hill , remains of a chapultepec aqueduct , paths associated with nezahualcoyotl , and an area where aztec priests ingested peyote as part of religious rites . one notable site is the baths of moctezuma , which was a systems of tanks , reservoirs , canals and waterfalls constructed by the aztecs . the instituto nacional de antropología e historia has the park , as well as the chapultepec castle on the hill , listed as mexican heritage sites . they submitted the area for consideration as a world heritage site in 2001 . unesco the park received an estimated 15 million visitors each year , and daily visits exceed 250,000 . sunday is the most popular day to visit because the museums are free , and visitors may spend the entire day in one or more sections viewing the attractions , picnicking , or grilling . despite its local popularity , however , foreign visitors usually only see the small fraction of the park near the museums . the park is easy to get to via public transportation . metro lines 1 and 7 have stations at park entrances to the east and south respectively . several bus lines along paseo de la reforma . thumb . first section . image : museo nacional de antropologia ( 5605429532 ) . jpg thumb right national museum of anthropology the oldest and most visited portion of the park is called the '' first section '' . it is the most developed area , and it has a wrought iron fence and gates that extend around its perimeter . these fences mostly separate it from the streets that form its boundaries : avenida constituyentes ( es ) , paseo de la reforma , calzada chivatito , and the anillo periférico . the interior measures 274.03 hectares ( 677.1 acres ) , with 182 hectares ( 450 acres ) of this being undeveloped green space . it contains most of the best known of the park 's attractions , such as the lago menor ( small lake ) , the nezahuacoyotl fountain , the fuente de las ranas , the quixote fountain , the templanza fountain , the altar a la patria , the obelisco a los niños héroes , the monumento a las águilas caídas ( monument to fallen eagles ) , the ahuehuete , and the baths of moctezuma . the best-known museums in the park are in this section , including chapultepec castle , the casa del lago , the national auditorium , the centro cultural del bosque ( es ) , the national museum of anthropology , the rufino tamayo museum , and the museo de arte moderno ( modern art museum ) . it also contains the chapultepec zoo , the jardín de la tercera edad , and the audiorama . these are connected by various paved paths , many of which have names such as the avenue of the poets , which is lined with bronze busts of famous literary figures . the pathway also has trees that are hundreds of years old . this section of the park also contains the geological formation that gave the park/forest its name : chapultepec hill . it is a formation of volcanic rock and andesite , which is common in the valley of mexico and contains small caves and sand deposits . '' chapultepec '' in nahuatl means '' grasshopper hill '' but it is not clear whether the '' chapul '' ( grasshopper ) part refers to the shape of the hill , or the abundance of grasshoppers in the surrounding woods . this hill was considered special during the pre-hispanic period from the toltecs in the 12th century to the aztecs up to the time of the conquest by the spanish . remains of a toltec altar have been found at the top of the hill , a number of burials and its use was reserved only for tlatoani and other elite . after the conquest , a small chapel dedicated to the archangel michael was built on the hill by claudio de arciniega in the middle of the 16th century . in the 18th century , the spanish built the chapultepec castle , which initially was a summer retreat for viceroys . after the independence , the castle remained for the elite , becoming the official residence of mexico 's heads of state , including the emperor maximilian , who had the paseo de la reforma built to connect this area with the historic center of the city . during this time , the castle and the gardens around it were enlarged and embellished a number of times , giving the castle a floorspace of . the most outstanding of the patios and garden is the alcázar . in 1940 , the president 's residence was moved to the nearby los pinos complex , and the castle was converted into the museo nacional de historia , under the auspices of the federal government , along with the rest of the hill . the museum contains twelve rooms which are open to the public , many of which as they were when the emperor maximilian lived there . it also contains a collection of furniture from the colonial period to the 19th century , utensils , suits , coins , manuscripts , sculptures in clay ivory and silver , and many other art works . a number of items belonged to figures such as miguel hidalgo y costilla , josé maría morelos y pavón , agustín de iturbide , benito juárez , emiliano zapata , and others . in addition , there are murals by josé clemente orozco , david alfaro siqueiros and juan o'gorman . at the foot of the hill , there is a large monument to the niños héroes ( also called the altar a la patria ) , who reportedly threw themselves to their death at the castle rather than surrendering to battle for mexico city . this monument consist of six marble columns surrounding a mausoleum with the remains of the six cadets , and a figure of a woman who represents mexico . the chapultepec zoo is the most visited attraction of the park , especially on sundays . it is estimated that half of all park visitors come to the zoo . the zoo was established by alfonso l . herrera , a biologist , and opened in 1924 . herrera 's intention was to reestablish the zoo tradition of the old aztec emperors and improve upon it . he began with species native to mexico and then added others from the rest of the world . he modeled the zoo after the bioparco di roma in rome , italy . between 1950 and 1960 , the zoo expanded and added new species . in 1975 , the zoo obtained two pandas from china . since then , at least eight panda cubs have been born at the zoo , making it the first institution outside of china to breed the species . from 1992 to 1994 , the zoo was completely remodeled , categorizing exhibits by habitat rather than type of species . some of the most important mexican species at the facility include a rabbit native to only a few volcanoes in mexico , the volcano rabbit , the mexican wolf , ocelot , jaguar and axolotl . today , it has 16,000 animals of 270 species , separated into four sections according to habitat : tropical forest , temperate forest , desert , and grassland . about one third of the animals are native to mexico . most of the museums in the first section are located along paseo de la reforma . of all of the museums in the park , the most famous is the national museum of anthropology , considered one of the most famous archeological museums in the world . the museum has a number of antecedents beginning from the colonial period , but the current institution was created in the 1960s with the building and grounds designed by architect pedro ramírez vázquez . this museum has an area of and 25 exhibit halls with sections devoted to each of the major pre-hispanic civilizations in mexico , including the aztec , maya , toltec , and olmec . the permanent collection is quite large , and many visitors spend several hours seeing it . there are also temporary exhibits displayed year-round . the rufino tamayo museum is in the first section on paseo de la reforma . the permanent collection mostly focuses on the namesake , but there are also works by other mexican and foreign artists that tamayo donated . during his lifetime , tamayo collected one of the most important collections of 20th-century art , which included art works from andy warhol , picasso , miró , fernando botero , magritte , and about 100 others . the museo de arte moderno ( museum of modern art ) is located on paseo de la reforma and calle gandhi , and it hosts various temporary exhibits . the museum 's complex was constructed using modern architecture techniques , which consisted of two circular buildings surrounding a sculpture garden . it contains one of the leading collections of modern art of the 20th century of mexico . artists include dr . atl , frida kahlo , david alfaro siqueiros , and remedios varo . the casa de cultura quinta colorada was originally a former accommodation for the forest rangers of the area in the early 20th century . the house was made using european style architecture techniques . it hosts various cultural activities for visitors and has a small planetarium . at the foot of the chapultepec hill is an extension of the museum of history called the museo del caracol ( snail museum ) . this museum narrates the history of mexico in the winding form of a snail , the shape of the building from which its name comes . the luis barragán house and studio is the former home of architect luis barragán . the house was kept nearly intact since 1948 , including the workshop . it also exhibits artworks from the 19th and 20th century . one of the most popular features in the first section is an artificial lake called the lago menor ( smaller lake ) . it is one of two lakes in the park ; the larger one , lago mayor , is in the second section . lagor menor , however , attracts more visitors than the other . visitors can rent paddleboats and small rowboats at the lake . the lago menor was created in the late 19th century , when the first section ( then the entire park ) was redesigned . at the same time lago menor was created , the casa del lago was constructed . it is shallow with an average depth of a little over one meter . the casa del lago , also called the restaurante del lago , is now a restaurant that serves continental food and some mexican dishes . in addition to the lake , there are a number of large fountains . the quixote fountain is surrounded by four benches covered in tile with images of don quixote . to the side of this plaza , there are two columns . on the right there is a figure of quixote with the face of salvador dalí and on the other side , there is a depiction of sancho panza with the face of diego rivera . both statues were made of bronze by josé maría fernández urbina . the fuente de las ranas ( fountain of the frogs ) was created in the 1920s , by miguel alessio robles in seville , spain . the nezahualcoyotl fountain was inaugurated in 1956 . it measures and surrounds a statue of the aztec ruler nine meters tall in black stone . throughout the first section , there are different kinds of trees ; the most common one is the montezuma cypress , locally called '' ahuehuetes '' . a number of these are hundreds of years old , although there are far fewer due to a past disease epidemic . one dead specimen is called the ahuehuete of moctezuma , commonly referred to as el sargento ( the sargeant ) or as the centinela ( sentinel ) . the last two names were given by cadets of the heroic military academy during the 19th century . the 500-year-old tree remains as a monument to the area 's history , measuring high , forty in circumference . another tree of the species , still living , is el tlatoani , which is more than 700 years old and is the oldest tree in the park . in addition to these trees , there are sequoias , cedars , palms , populus , pines , ginkgos , and more . los pinos has been the official residence of the presidents of mexico since 1941 . though the presidential residence is inside the park , there is no public access to it . the residence is made up of white stucco structures ; this architecture can be seen from molino del rey , a former millhouse and site of battle of molino del rey . los pinos is on one edge of the park . the national auditorium is one of mexico city 's principal arenas . it primarily hosts musical ensembles and dance troupes . singers from mexico and abroad perform there yearlong . the park hosts a number of cultural events during the year . one of them is the performance of swan lake , which is conducted on a stage in lago menor . this performance has been given since 1978 in warmer months . night tours by train that go around the park are popular around christmas time , when many of the attractions are lit for the season . the ballet folklórico de méxico also holds performances on occasion at chapultepec castle . . second section . the second section of the park was created in 1964 by expanding over former farmlands . this section is separated by anillo periférico road and measures 160.02 hectares . it is not as developed as the first section , but it is also dedicated to recreational activities . lago mayor overlaps with the second section ; this part of the lake contains the monumental fountain , the largest one in latin america . it is surrounded by several restaurants and cafés . nearby are the compositores , xochipilli and las serpientes fountains . the area contains jogging trails , places for yoga and karate , and other exercise facilities on the tree areas . around 1,000 people each day go to this section to exercise . the jogging trails were doubled from 2 & nbsp ; km to 4 & nbsp ; km in the late 2000s . one part of this section is dominated by the feria de chapultepec amusement park , located near the lago mayor , just off the anillo periférico . the park has a capacity of 15,000 people and is visited by about two million each year . it includes several roller coasters , including the montaña infinitum . this section contains museums such as papalote museo del niño , the technology museum of the federal electricity commission ( es ) , and the museo de historia natural ( es ) . el papalote museo del niño is an interactive children 's museum which invites children to touch and manipulate the exhibits . the technology museum consists of four very large halls which exhibit modern advances in technology . in its surrounding gardens , there are old locomotives , railcars and tracks . it also contains an auditorium for events and a planetarium . the museo de historia natural focuses mostly on the origins of life with its permanent exhibits . it also hosts temporary exhibits and academic conferences . the cárcamo de dolores hydraulic structure , found in this section , was built between 1942 and 1952 to capture water sent to the valley of mexico from the lerma river basin in the toluca valley . the major parts open to the public consist of a pavilion , covered with an orange half cupola and a fountain with an image of tlaloc . originally , the water was stored underground and pumped to the surface when needed . the main building has serpent heads on the four corners and there is a mural painted by diego rivera called el agua : origen de la vida . in 2010 , the second section of the park underwent rehabilitation , funded in part by a private charity group called probosque de chapultepec . most of the work was done on the jogging track , the tlaloc fountain , the cárcamo de dolores building , the el agua : origen de la vida mural , and the construction of an agora . these works together form the museo jardín del agua ( water garden museum ) . in addition , a large number of dead trees were removed and about 800 new ones planted . . third section . the third section of the park is located on the west side of the second and was inaugurated in 1974 . it has a surface area of 242.9 hectares . it is the least developed and least visited ; it is filled with trees and wildlife . although some recreational activities such as archery and horseback riding are practiced there , the importance of this area is primarily as an ecological preserve for various species of flora and fauna , such as snakes and lizards . in 1992 , it was decreed as a protected natural area . in 2010 , there were reports of feral dogs attacking visitors in the third section . approximately 150 feral dogs were living in the small canyon areas of this section that year . . see also . chapultepec peace accords . references . further reading . moerer , andrea kristine . '' changing chapultepec : construction , consumption , and cultural politics in a mexico city forest , 1934-1944 . '' phd dissertation , university of minnesota ( 2013 ) . external links . website with current event schedules and historical articles & images about chapultepec . satellite picture of chapultepec park by google maps satellite picture of chapultepec castle by google maps satellite picture of los pinos by google maps images of chapultepec