Scrambling

overview . image : crib goch ridge arp.jpg thumb upright part of the crib goch ridge , wales . although ropes may be sensible on harder scrambles , sustained use of rope and belay counts as climbing ; typically , the use of ropes in scrambling is limited to basic safety uses . while much of the enjoyment of scrambling depends on the freedom from technical apparatus , unroped scrambling in exposed situations is potentially one of the most dangerous of mountaineering activities . for this reason , mountain walkers are advised to carry a rope on harder scrambles . scramblers are also advised to know their limits and to turn back before they get into difficulties . some mountain tops may be reached by walking or scrambling up their least-steep side . hazards and safety . many easy scrambles become serious climbs in bad weather . black ice or verglas is a particular problem in cold weather , and mist or fog can disorient scramblers very quickly . hypothermia is an insidious danger for all hikers and especially inexperienced hikers . weather does not need to be very cold to be dangerous since ordinary rain or mist has a strong cooling effect . in mild weather , hikers may neglect to bring appropriate clothing or gear for keeping dry and warm enough for safety . scramblers normally travel equipped with a waterproof jacket and other protective clothing , as well as emergency supplies of food and drink . a large-scale map is also needed , so that the route can be followed with accuracy , and escape made via recognised paths in the case of bad weather or injury . the ten essentials , and a companion are recommended for any scramble , as well as the need to leave details of the planned trip with a responsible person . where snow conditions exist , a helmet , ice axe , crampons , and the knowledge to use them , are also recommended for mountain hikes . the mountaineers , freedom of the hills , ( the mountaineers books , 7th ed . 2003 ) , . classification systems . image : aggy ridge.jpg left thumb the aonach eagach above the a82 , looking up glen coe , scotland . in the u.s . , scrambling is class 3 in the yosemite decimal system of climb difficulties . in the british system it is easy with some of the harder scrambles incorporating moves of moderate or even difficult standard . some guidebooks on scrambling may rate the routes as follows : easy — generally , just off-trail hiking with minimal exposure ( if at all ) and perhaps a handhold or two . uiaa class i . moderate — handholds frequently needed , possible exposure , route-finding skills helpful . uiaa class ii . difficult — almost constant handholds , fall distance may be fatal , route-finding skills needed , loose and downsloping rock . less-experienced parties may consider using a rope for short sections . yds class 3 , 4 , and possibly 5 . in britain scrambles are usually rated using ashton 's steve ashton , scrambles in snowdonia , ( cicerone press , 1992 ) , system of either grade 1 , 2 , 3 or 3s ( s for serious ) , with the grade being based around technical difficulty and exposure . the north ridge of tryfan in snowdonia , or striding edge on helvellyn in the lake district , are classic grade 1 scrambles . at the other end of the scale , broad stand on scafell is usually considered grade 3 or 3s . some of the older scottish guidebooks used a system of grades 1 to 5 , leading to considerable confusion and variation over grades 1 , 2 and 3 in scotland . by country . canada . image : stanley peak.jpg thumb right stanley peak , british columbia , canada a guide to 175 scrambling routes in the canadian rockies can be found in scrambles in the canadian rockies by alan kane . backpacker magazine has twice featured the book as an expedition guide . the canadian alpine journal referred to it as a '' scree gospel '' . . italy . via ferrata is '' a mountain route equipped with fixed ladders , cables , and bridges in order to be accessible to climbers and walkers '' common in the dolomites of italy . this form of scrambling has climbing aids built in on the route that help make it safe . the essence of a modern via ferrata is a steel cable which runs along the route and is periodically ( every fixed to the rock . using a via ferrata kit , climbers can secure themselves to the cable , limiting any fall . the cable can also be used as an aid to climbing , and additional climbing aids , such as iron rungs ( stemples ) , pegs , carved steps and even ladders and bridges are often provided . thus , via ferratas allow otherwise dangerous routes to be undertaken without the risks associated with unprotected scrambling and climbing or the need for climbing equipment such as ropes . such routes allow the relatively inexperienced a means of enjoying dramatic positions and accessing difficult peaks , normally the preserve of the serious mountaineer ; although , as there is a need for some equipment , a good head for heights and basic technique , the via ferrata can be seen as a distinct step up from ordinary mountain walking . united kingdom . scrambling has become an increasingly popular form of mountaineering in britain ; the english lake district , the scottish highlands , and the north of snowdonia in wales being the chief regions of interest . popular scrambling guidebooks exist for these areas , outlining a wide spectrum of routes in terms of both difficulty and style . uk scrambles come in many forms : the ascents , descents and traverses of ridges , gully and ghyll scrambles , rakes ( lines of weakness that penetrate large , and often sheer , rock faces ) , and the ascents of buttresses and faces . uk scrambles vary enormously in length ; from as little height gain as 30 metres , as with many crag rock climbs , up to the 700+ metres of vertical height gain encountered on tower ridge , a famous 3s grade scramble that ascends ben nevis via its north face ( tower ridge is also graded as a 'difficult ' rock climb - arguably britain 's longest . ) . scrambles in snowdonia typically feature between 60 ( e.g . milestone gully , tryfan . ) and 500 metres ( e.g . bryant 's gully , glyder fawr ) of height gain . ridge routes that involve some scrambling are especially popular in britain , including crib goch on snowdon , bristly ridge on glyder fach , striding edge on helvellyn , and sharp edge on blencathra , both in the english lake district , as well as numerous routes in scotland , such as the aonach eagach ridge in glencoe . many of these routes include a '' bad step '' , where the scrambling suddenly becomes much more serious . the bad step on crib goch for example , involves only or so of climbing , but the position is exposed . the rock face here is well polished by countless boots , but there are many holds which offer firm support . by contrast , the traverse of the cuillin ridge on skye demands use of a rope at one point at least . the ridge routes of liathach and beinn eighe in wester ross are easier to traverse but are extremely exposed . descent from such ridges is very limited , so once committed , the scrambler must continue to the end . an teallach to the north offers scrambling , as does stac pollaidh further north in sutherland , which includes a bad step . one resource for scramblers in britain are the guides by w a poucher ( 1891–1988 ) , though these are now dated and more recent guide books exist . a community project consisting of a comprehensive list of scrambles in the united kingdom is available at ukscrambles.com . . poland and slovakia . scrambling has grown ever so popular in recent years with more experienced mountain hikers in tatras , the highest mountain range within the 1500 & nbsp ; km-long chain of carpathians , located on the border between poland and slovakia . a hiker who has scaled all possible marked tourist trails will in time typically start looking for more ambitious goals , namely those peaks that by law are only accessible via hiring a licensed mountain guide ( for a fee ) . more adventurous individuals , however , or those on a tight budget ( often college/university students ) endeavour to climb those harder accessible summits without assistance , especially since very accurate descriptions of ( typically '' normal '' , i.e . the easiest ) routes are readily available on the internet . apart from dedicated websites , an exemplary website containing description of several routes leading up to the summit of gerlach : guidebooks for rock climbers by : pl : witold henryk paryski or : pl : władysław cywiński ( poland ) and : sk : arno puškáš ( slovakia ) are particularly popular . there is an informal peak bagging challenge called : pl : wielka korona tatr / velka korona tatier ( or great crown of tatras ) , involving climbing tatras ' all fourteen 8-thousanders ( in feet ) , only 3 of which are accessible by marked hiking trails . typically , they are graded at most i or ii in tatra climbing difficulty scale ( equivalent to british grade 3/3s ) . see also . peak bagging sure-footedness walking in the united kingdom . references . external links . british mountain council : hill skills ( scrambling ) goxplore guides article on scrambling