Birger Jarl

biography . early life . it is known that birger grew up and spent his adolescence in bjälbo , östergötland but the exact date of his birth remains uncertain and available historical sources are contradictory . examinations of his mortal remains indicate that he was probably about 50 upon his death in 1266 which would indicate a birth around 1216 . however , his father magnus minnesköld is assumed to have died no later than 1210 , which would lead to an assumed birth a few years earlier . under any circumstance , he was the son of ingrid ylva , who according to olaus petri was a daughter of sune sik and granddaughter of king sverker i of sweden , which would make birger a matrilineal member of the house of sverker . his brothers or half-brothers — eskil , karl , and bengt — were all born long before 1200 , and it can therefore be assumed that they had another mother . he was also a nephew of the jarl birger brosa from the house of bjelbo . the combination of this background proved to be of vital importance . upon examination of his bones in 2002 , it was determined that birger would have been just around 50 at the time of his death , about 10 years younger than previously believed . see kari , risto . suomalaisten keskiaika . wsoy 2004 . see page 119 . birger , thus most likely born at the time for the battle of gestilren in 1210 and named after his uncle birger brosa , one of the most potent men of the era who died in 1202 , started his career in the mid-1230s by marrying ingeborg eriksdotter , the sister of king eric xi of sweden according to the eric chronicles ( erikskrönikan ) in fierce rivalry with other suitors . during the 15 years to follow , birger then consolidated his position and was probably one of the most influential men years before being formally given the title jarl in 1248 by king eric xi . birger was later claimed to have been responsible for a military campaign against the novgorod republic that russians claim ended in a victory by alexander nevsky during a battle the russians refer to as neva battle in 1240 . while swedish sources have no information on the battle at all , a 16th-century russian legend tells that the swedish '' king '' was wounded in the face while dueling against prince alexander nevsky himself . although birger jarl saw many battles , some have speculated that traces of a sword blow in birger 's cranium might have originated from this battle . . see also '' battle on the neva '' , 16th century version of the battle , provided by the slavic interest group of the society for creative anachronism . in english . however , the original 14th-century russian version of the battle had no information on this at all . . hosted by the national archive of finland . in swedish . see also original text ; in russian . . career . thumb when the papal diplomat william of modena visited present sweden around 1248 , he urged the swedish kings to fulfill the rules of the catholic church , an exhortation which birger seems to have taken as a chance to strengthen his position by simply taking the side of the church against other members of his family ( alternatively it 's possible to interpret this as a manifestation of his pious side ) . this was a choice of historical importance as it was to make birger a jarl powerful enough to ultimately wind up the office , thus making him the last swedish jarl ever , even called as the '' first true king of sweden '' by historians . as this happened during an era when the inherited concept folkung became more of a political party , it also meant swedish magnates lost most of their influence which paved the way for a consolidated swedish kingdom supported by the pope . in 1247 , royal troops led by birger at the battle of sparrsätra ( slaget vid sparrsätra ) fought with folkung forces led by pretender holmger knutsson , son of king canute ii . the folkungs lost the battle and were unable to resist the central government and its taxes . holmger knutsson fled to gästrikland and was captured there by birger in the following year . quickly brought to trial , he was beheaded . in 1249 , birger succeeded in ending a decades-long period of hostilities with norway . as a part of the treaty of lödöse , he also managed to marry off his daughter rikissa , then only 11 years old , to haakon haakonsson the young , the eldest son of king haakon iv of norway . presumably later that year , birger led an expedition to finland , later dubbed as the second swedish crusade , which permanently established the swedish rule in finland . on king eric 's death in 1250 , birger 's son valdemar was elected as the new king while birger acted as regent , holding the true power in sweden until his death . kari , p . 149 . in 1252 , a year after another victory over the folkungs at the battle of herrevadsbro ( slaget vid herrevadsbro ) , birger wrote two carefully dated letters , the first mention of stockholm interpreted as the foundation of the city or at least some sort of special interest in the location . neither of the letters give a description of the location , however , and while archaeological traces of older defensive structures have been found there , what did exist on the premises before the mid 13th century remains debated . it has been suggested birger chose the location for several reasons : partly to curb domestic magnates by isolating them with a '' lock of lake mälaren '' , offering a defense to the lands around mälaren from invading enemies in the process ; and to create a commercial bridgehead to attract german merchants . while birger 's direct involvement in the foundation of the city remains speculative , it probably was no accident it was founded on the location at this time , as there were alternative passages into mälaren during the preceding viking era ; as crusades , a kind of viking raids in a christian disguise , had proven increasingly unsuccessful ; and as taking control over the location , traditionally where men supposedly gathered before the ledung , meant old offensive military traditions could be replaced by more '' modern '' commercial efforts directed towards lübeck . birger thus combined financial support from germany with papal political support to consolidate his own position . thumb . late life . ingeborg died in 1254 and in 1261 birger married the danish queen dowager matilda of holstein . birger died on 21 october 1266 , at jälbolung in västergötland . his grave in varnhem abbey was opened in may 2002 . there is a statue of the great duke in his own square birger jarls torg next to riddarholmskyrkan in stockholm , erected by bengt erland fogelberg at the expense of the over-governor of stockholm in 1854 . there is a cenotaph for him at the base of the tower of stockholm city hall . it was originally intended that his remains be removed there , but this was never done . several other historical structures there are also named for him including the street birger jarlsgatan on norrmalm and the tower birger jarls torn on riddarholmen . the hotel birger jarl is located in stockholm 's norrmalm neighborhood . he is also the central figure of bröllopet på ulvåsa by frans hedberg ( 1865 ) . . children . source : ( except christine ) : jan svanberg in furstebilder från folkungatid p 243 . mother unknown . gregers birgersson . from marriage with ingeborg eriksdotter of sweden . the marriage was contracted relatively near the time when ingeborg 's brother the once-deposed eric xi returned from exile in denmark in 1234 . rikissa birgersdotter , born 1238 , married firstly 1251 haakon the young , co-king of norway , and secondly , henry i of werle valdemar birgersson , born c 1238 , king of sweden 1250–1275 , lord of parts of götaland until 1278 christina birgersdotter , married presumably several times , one of her husbands was lord sigge guttormsson magnus birgersson , born 1240 , duke ( of södermanland ) , then king of sweden 1275-90 probably : catherine of sweden , born 1245 , married siegfried , count of anhalt eric birgersson , born 1250 , duke ( of småland ) probably : ingeborg of sweden , born ca . 1254 , died 30 june 1302 , married john i , duke of saxony in 1270 benedict , duke of finland , born 1254 , bishop of linköping . with matilda of holstein ( doubtful ) . christine birgersdotter . see also . ingeborg eriksdotter of sweden , duchess of sweden 1248-1254 matilda of holstein , duchess of sweden 1261-1288 . ancestry . references . ; bibliography . external links . birger magnusson genealogy