1978 in literature

events . march 8 – douglas adams ' comic science fiction series the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy originates as a radio comedy broadcast on the u.k . bbc radio 4 . march – philip larkin ends his relationships with maeve brennan and betty mackereth . april – james blaylock 's first published story , '' the ape-box affair '' , appears in unearth magazine , pioneering steampunk fiction . august 1 – barbara pym is a guest on desert island discs . october – the bookseller/diagram prize for oddest title of the year , a humorous award given annually to books with unusual titles , is launched at the frankfurt book fair . the first winner is proceedings of the second international workshop on nude mice . november 15 – harold pinter 's play betrayal , inspired by a seven-year clandestine extramarital affair with bbc television presenter joan bakewell , opens at the national theatre in london , directed by peter hall and featuring penelope wilton and her husband at this time , daniel massey , with michael gambon . december 15 – the berlin state library 's new haus potsdamer straße is opened in west berlin 's kulturforum . unknown date – antonia white 's 1933 novel frost in may becomes the first in virago press 's modern classics series of reissues of books by neglected women authors , published in the uk . . new books . fiction . etel adnan – sitt marie rose srikrishna alanahalli – parasangada gendethimma kingsley amis – jake 's thing martin amis – success jessica anderson – tirra lirra by the river aharon appelfeld – badenheim 1939 ( באדנהיים & nbsp ; עיר & nbsp ; נופש , badenhaim ` ir nofesh ) richard bach – illusions beryl bainbridge – young adolf thomas berger – arthur rex : a legendary novel thomas bernhard – yes ( ja ) adolfo bioy casares – the hero of women ( el héroe de las mujeres ) william peter blatty – the ninth configuration charles bukowski – women anthony burgess – 1985 taylor caldwell – bright flows the river alejo carpentier – el arpa y la sombra ( the harp and the shadow ) chantal chawaf – rougeâtre john cheever – the stories of john cheever c . j . cherryh – well of shiuan cho se-hui – the dwarf ( 난장이가 쏘아 올린 작은 공 , a dwarf launches a little ball ) brian cleeve – judith mary elizabeth counselman – half in shadow l . sprague de camp the best of l . sprague de camp the great fetish conan the swordsman ( with lin carter and björn nyberg ) samuel r . delany – empire : a visual novel don delillo – running dog nelson demille – by the rivers of babylon phyllis eisenstein – born to exile j . g . farrell – the singapore grip howard fast – second generation ken follett – eye of the needle alan dean foster – splinter of the mind 's eye ernest j . gaines – in my father 's house jane gardam – god on the rocks graham greene – the human factor donald hamilton – the silencers harry harrison – the stainless steel rat james herbert – the spear william hjortsberg – falling angel timothy mo – the monkey king john irving – the world according to garp marshall jevons – murder at the margin james jones – whistle ismail kadare – the three-arched bridge ( ura me tri harqe ) m . m . kaye – the far pavilions stephen king the stand night shift ( collection of short stories including '' children of the corn '' ) christopher koch – the year of living dangerously larry kramer – faggots judith krantz – scruples jaan kross – the czar 's madman ( keisri hull ) derek lambert – the saint peter 's plot camara laye – le maître de la parole – kouma lafôlô kouma ( the guardian of the word ) ursula k . le guin – the eye of the heron madeleine l'engle – a swiftly tilting planet robert ludlum – the holcroft covenant john d . macdonald – the empty copper sea david malouf – an imaginary life dambudzo marechera – the house of hunger richard matheson – what dreams may come ian mcewan – the cement garden james a . michener – chesapeake patrick modiano – rue des boutiques obscures ( translated as missing person ) alice munro – who do you think you are ? ( the beggar maid : stories of flo and rose in u.s . ) larry niven – the magic goes away tim o'brien – going after cacciato andrew j . offutt – conan and the sorcerer john l . parker jr . – once a runner robert b . parker – the judas goat elizabeth peters – street of the five moons william luther pierce – the turner diaries belva plain – evergreen mario puzo – fools die mary renault – the praise singer ruth rendell – a sleeping life hubert selby jr . – requiem for a dream jaswant singh kanwal – lahoo di lo ( dawn of the blood ) whitley strieber – the wolfen thomas sullivan – diapason john updike – the coup gore vidal – kalki william wharton – birdy herman wouk – war and remembrance richard yates – a good school frank yerby – hail the conquering hero roger zelazny – the courts of chaos . children and young people . janet and allan ahlberg – each peach , pear , plum ( approximate year ) alicia austin – alicia austin 's age of dreams judy blume – wifey raymond briggs – the snowman roald dahl – the enormous crocodile rumer godden – a kindle of kittens gwen grant – private – keep out david larkin ( with brian froud and alan lee ) – faeries bill peet – eli david rees – the exeter blitz seymour reit ( with roberto innocenti ) all kinds of planes all kinds of ships all kinds of trains sails , rails , and wings louis sachar – sideways stories from wayside school ( first in the wayside school series of six books ) rosemary sutcliff – song for a dark queen arnold wesker – fatlips : a story for children arnulf zitelmann ( with willi glasauer ) – kleiner weg ( small trail ) . drama . miguel m . abrahão – o chifrudo douglas adams – the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy ( radio play ) brian clark – whose life is it anyway ? max frisch – tryptichon : drei szenische bilder ( triptych ) david hare – plenty ira levin – deathtrap mary o'malley – once a catholic heiner müller – germania death in berlin ( first performance ) harold pinter – betrayal sam shepard – buried child martin sherman – bent victoria wood – talent . poetry . maya angelou – and still i rise robert minhinnick – a thread in the maze luis alberto spinetta – guitarra negra ( black guitar ) john tripp – collected poems . non-fiction . hannah arendt ( died 1975 ) – the life of the mind gisela bleibtreu-ehrenberg – tabu homosexualität roger caron – go-boy ! memories of a life behind bars lord david cecil – a portrait of jane austen charlotte chandler – hello , i must be going ! beth chatto – the dry garden christina crawford – mommie dearest gerald durrell – the garden of the gods don e . fehrenbacher – the dred scott case : its significance in american law and politics john gall – systemantics h . r . haldeman – the ends of power mollie katzen – moosewood cookbook mary midgley – beast and man : the roots of human nature biblica – bible , new international version ( translated into modern american english ) richard nixon – the memoirs of richard nixon m . scott peck – the road less travelled david rorvik – in his image : the cloning of a man rorvik intentionally left the word '' his '' uncapitalized in the title of this book . see talk : david rorvik . edward said – orientalism . births . february 1 – arno camenisch , swiss writer july 23 – lauren groff , american novelist and short story writer october 24 – kei miller , jamaican-born poet and fiction writer unknown dates filippo bologna , italian novelist and screenwriter david llewellyn , welsh screenwriter samanta schweblin , argentine fiction writer rachel trezise , welsh novelist and short story writer . deaths . january 12 – robert harbin , south african-born author of books on magic ( born 1908 ) march 1 – paul scott , english novelist , playwright and poet ( born 1920 ) march 24 – leigh brackett , american science fiction writer ( born 1915 ) april 14 – f . r . leavis , english academic literary critic ( born 1895 ) may 1 – sylvia townsend warner , english poet and novelist ( born 1893 ) may 12 – louis zukofsky , american modernist poet ( born 1904 ) june 11 – carola oman , english historical novelist , biographer and children 's writer ( born 1897 ) june 18 – walter c . alvarez , american medical author ( born 1884 ) august 11 – berta ruck , indian-born welsh romantic novelist ( born 1878 ) august 28 – robert shaw , english-born actor , novelist and playwright ( born 1927 ) september 3 – basil willey , english academic literary critic ( died 1897 ) september 15 – edmund crispin ( robert bruce montgomery ) , english crime writer and composer ( born 1921 ) september 28 – pope john paul i ( albino luciani ) , italian author of illustrissimi ( born 1912 ) november 5 – n . crevedia , romanian poet , novelist and journalist ( born 1902 ) november 15 – margaret mead , american cultural anthropologist and author ( born 1901 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : isaac bashevis singer bookseller/diagram prize for oddest title of the year is first awarded . the winner is proceedings of the second international workshop on nude mice . canada . see 1978 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : patrick modiano , rue des boutiques obscures prix médicis french : georges perec , la vie mode d'emploi prix médicis international : aleksandr zinovyev , l'avenir radieux – russia . spain . miguel de cervantes prize : dámaso alonso . united kingdom . booker prize : iris murdoch , the sea , the sea carnegie medal for children 's literature : david rees , the exeter blitz cholmondeley award : christopher hope , leslie norris , peter reading , d.m . thomas , r.s . thomas eric gregory award : ciarán carson , peter denman , christopher reid , paul wilkins , martyn a . ford , james sutherland-smith james tait black memorial prize for fiction : maurice gee , plumb james tait black memorial prize for biography : robert gittings , the older hardy . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for fiction , peter taylor nebula award : vonda mcintyre , dreamsnake newbery medal for children 's literature : katherine paterson , bridge to terabithia pulitzer prize for drama : donald l . coburn , the gin game pulitzer prize for fiction : james alan mcpherson , elbow room pulitzer prize for poetry : howard nemerov , collected poems . elsewhere . miles franklin award : jessica anderson , tirra lirra by the river premio nadal : germán sánchez espeso , narciso viareggio prize : antonio altomonte , dopo il presidente . references .