Riders of the Purple Wage

plot introduction . riders of the purple wage is an extrapolation of the mid-twentieth century 's tendency towards state supervision and consumer-oriented economic planning . in the story , all citizens receive a basic income ( the purple wage ) from the government , to which everyone is entitled just by being born . the population is self-segregated into relatively small communities , with a controlled environment , and keeps in contact with the rest of the world through the fido , a combination television and videophone . the typical dwelling is an egg-shaped house , outside of which is a realistic simulation of an open environment with sky , sun , and moon . in reality , each community is on one level of a multi-level arcology . for those who dislike this lifestyle , there are wildlife reserves where they can join '' tribes '' of native americans and like-minded anglos living closer to nature for a while . some choose this lifestyle permanently . art ( and art appreciation ) are prominently displayed in this society . artists receive press coverage comparable to that of today 's movie stars . hardly less glamorous are the art critics , each of whom has a pet theory about art . a critic also acts as an agent and manager , promoting the work of one or more artists , especially if their work seems to support his ideas . the story revolves around one of these pampered artists , who sometimes finds himself uninspired , due to the lack of major conflicts in society . sexual relations and sexual orientation are portrayed as absolutely free from prejudice . the main character is bisexual , and it is implied that most of his acquaintances have had at least experimental relations with members of both sexes . several forms of birth control are also commonplace , encouraged by the government , and freely discussed . for people who do not want to bother with social interaction , there is the fornixator , a device that supplies sexual pleasure on demand by direct stimulation of the brain 's pleasure centers . the fornixator is technically illegal , but tolerated by the government because its users are happy , never demand anything else , and usually do not procreate . two new sets of customs have arisen which profoundly influence the story . by tradition , everyone has a naming day when they are grown , at which point they select a name which reflects their outlook on life , their chosen profession , or the way they want others to see them . the second change derives from the so-called '' panamorite '' religion , which features total sexual freedom including oral sex between parents and their children . one source of frustration for the main character is his mother 's decision to '' cut him off '' from intimate physical contact , a situation made worse by her becoming morbidly obese , which is not unusual in this society . plot summary . the story revolves around the relationship between a young artist , who has taken the name chibiabos elgreco winnegan , and the man he calls '' grandpa winnegan '' ( actually his mother 's great-great-grandfather ) , who hides inside the apartments that '' chib '' shares with his mother in the community of ellay . grandpa is in hiding from the government , and most people think of him as having pulled off some huge swindle in the past . in fact , he was a successful businessman whose workers were highly paid and very content , much more so than the average recipient of the '' purple wage '' . the resentment which this caused motivated the '' gummint '' to close down his business , whereupon he managed to steal twenty billion dollars , which has never been found , and ( apparently ) died . a federal agent calling himself '' falco accipiter '' has resolved to hunt down the money at all costs , and is harassing chib . throughout the narrative we are treated to extracts from grandpa 's unpublished manuscript , private ejaculations . in these writings , he describes society and muses on human foibles . he seems particularly fond of james joyce , and this is a clue to the story 's resolution . chib is preparing for a new art show . he needs to win a grant to continue painting , otherwise he will have to take forced migration and live in another society , a practice by governments to prevent populations from becoming insular . chib 's own community is host to forcibly migrated arabs , who belong to the strict wahhabi sect of islam . chib wants to woo the daughter of one of these families , much to the disgust of her relatives . standing between chib and the grant is the one-eyed critic rex luscus , who took his name from '' inter caecos regnat luscus '' , better known as '' in the country of the blind , the one-eyed man is king '' . the price of rex 's approval , which will make chib famous , is sexual favors . chib 's art is controversial . he depicts religious scenes using a three-dimensional technique which presents different views , some of which are blasphemous comments on religion and humanity . like most young people , chib and his friends enjoy rebellion for its own sake . they pretend to plot terrorist attacks when they know they are under surveillance . such talk is so common that the listening authorities treat it with contempt . the police are laughable by 20th century standards . dressed in fur-like characters from the wizard of oz they use electric tricycles no faster than golf carts , which nonetheless are equipped with sirens '' to warn the bad guys they are coming '' . they have shock-sticks and guns which fire '' choke-gas pellets '' . chib 's exhibition dissolves into violence as his friend omar runes declaims an improvised poem in tribute to chib 's latest work . this is also common , particularly as the '' fido '' reporters are always keen to stir up trouble , and the artists hate the critics . one artist , a science fiction writer named huga wells-erb heinsturbury , starts the riot by attacking a reporter from time magazine , now a government-run news agency which has kept the attitudes of the original corporation , including a deep hatred of science fiction . chib smashes his painting , a blasphemous nativity scene , into rex luscus 's stomach . suddenly he receives a message from grandpa . falco accipiter has broken into the apartment and found his hiding place . grandpa is dead by the time chib reaches home . he apparently died of shock . in his hand is the last of his '' private ejaculations '' . a devout catholic himself , according to this last note he comforts himself in an atheist world with the thought that profound hatred of religion means that people still believe god exists , otherwise they would not hate him so . chib and his mother attend a reverse funeral , where the coffin which supposedly contained grandpa 's body is dug up . as it is opened , there is an explosion , which scatters the stolen billions into the air and sends up a banner announcing '' finnegan 's wake '' . grandpa has cocked a final snook at the '' gummint '' from beyond the grave . chib is handed a note by a man acting for grandpa 's estate . the note simply says that chib must abandon ellay , leave his mother , and break free so he can paint from love , not out of hatred . characters . chibiabos elgreco winnegan , a young artist and confidant of grandpa winnegan . in the poem hiawatha , '' the gentle chibiabos '' is hiawatha 's close friend . grandpa winnegan , whose original name was finnegan . he claimed to be a descendant of the '' tim finnegan '' whose death and resurrection are celebrated in the song finnegan 's wake . he is the last bastion of individual enterprise in the mechanized nanny-state . his adopted last name is a pun on '' win again '' . mama winnegan , chib 's mother who spends her life drinking , eating , and playing poker with disreputable friends . she may know that grandpa is hiding in their apartments , but pretends not to . falco accipter , a '' gummint '' agent who is determined to track down grandpa 's stolen money , and perhaps grandpa himself . rex luscus , one-eyed art critic whose eye is mostly on chib 's body . he could have his other eye replaced , but he claims that no art he sees makes it worth his while to have binocular vision . the '' young radishes '' , chib 's circle of friends who play at plotting revolution and defying authority through their art . their name is a pun on '' radical '' , meaning either a root ( as in root vegetable or radish ) or a person who advocates drastic change in society . omar bacchylides runic , a poet with a talent for extemporizing , and chib 's occasional lover . his improvised poems tend to inflame people to riot . benedictine serinus melba , a singer who claims to be pregnant by chib . thanks to an incident with a can of spermicide , chib finds this hard to believe . rousseau red hawk , who affects the persona of a '' red indian '' even though he is a jewish philosopher who feels intellectually deprived in the nature reserves . huga wells-erb heinsturbury , a science fiction writer whose unwieldy adopted name is derived from the names hugo gernsback , h . g . wells , edgar rice burroughs ( e.r.b ) , robert a . heinlein , theodore sturgeon and ray bradbury . pinkerton legrand , a gummint agent monitoring the young radishes . influences . in his afterword to the story , farmer mentions the triple revolution memo , a document sent to united states president lyndon johnson in 1964 , with policy suggestions for the future of the nation in the face of '' three separate and mutually reinforcing revolutions . '' these were identified as '' the cybernation revolution , '' ( massive automatic production , requiring progressively less human labor ) , '' the weaponry revolution '' ( the development of new forms of weaponry which can obliterate civilization ) , and '' the human rights revolution '' ( a universal demand for human rights ) . the source of rex luscus ' name is described in the story as the quote , '' in the country of the blind , the one-eyed man is king '' . the original phrase is '' in regione caecorum , rex est luscus , '' from desiderius erasmus roterodamus ' collecteana adagiorum . this is likely to also be a reference to the early sf writer h . g . wells ' story , '' the country of the blind '' in which a sighted man finds himself in a literal country of the blind , plots to use his advantage to rule them , but fails because his ability is not appreciated by the population . reception . '' riders of the purple wage '' is viewed as an example of modernism in new wave fiction involving joycean stream-of-consciousness . critic algis budrys said that '' riders of the purple wage '' shows how to '' write more and more about less and less . farmer can show you how to pile it higher and higher . an exercise in self-indulgence '' . . related works . a short story called '' the oögenesis of bird city '' ( 1971 ) describes an earlier time when the arcologies and the egg-houses were being introduced to society . of particular interest is a mention in the story that '' integration '' of communities was a failure and the technology could be used to allow people to dwell '' among their own kind '' . see also . sex and sexuality in speculative fiction . references . external links .