Adam Ferguson

life . born at logierait in atholl , perthshire , scotland , the son of rev adam ferguson , he received his education at logierait parish school , perth grammar school , and at the university of edinburgh and the university of st andrews ( ma 1742 ) . in 1745 , owing to his knowledge of gaelic , he gained appointment as deputy chaplain of the 43rd ( afterwards the 42nd ) regiment ( the black watch ) , the licence to preach being granted him by special dispensation , although he had not completed the required six years of theology study . it remains a matter of debate as to whether , at the battle of fontenoy ( 1745 ) , ferguson fought in the ranks throughout the day , and refused to leave the field , though ordered to do so by his colonel . nevertheless , he certainly did well , becoming principal chaplain in 1746 . he continued attached to the regiment till 1754 , when , disappointed at not obtaining a living , he left the clergy and resolved to devote himself to literary pursuits . after residing in leipzig for a time , he returned to edinburgh where in january 1757 he succeeded david hume as librarian to the faculty of advocates ( see advocates ' library ) , but soon relinquished this office on becoming tutor in the family of the earl of bute . in 1759 ferguson became professor of natural philosophy in the university of edinburgh , and in 1764 transferred to the chair of '' pneumatics '' ( mental philosophy ) '' and moral philosophy '' . in 1767 , he published his essay on the history of civil society , which was well received and translated into several european languages . in the mid-1770s he travelled again to the continent and met voltaire . his membership of the poker club is recorded in its minute book of 1776 . in 1776 , appeared his anonymous pamphlet on the american revolution in opposition to dr richard price 's observations on the nature of civil liberty , in which he sympathised with the views of the british legislature . in 1778 ferguson was appointed secretary to the carlisle peace commission which endeavoured , but without success , to negotiate an arrangement with the revolted colonies . in 1780 , he wrote the article '' history '' for the second edition of encyclopædia britannica . the article is 40 pages long and replaced the article in the first edition , which was only one paragraph . in 1783 appeared his history of the progress and termination of the roman republic , it became very popular and went through several editions . ferguson believed that the history of the roman republic during the period of their greatness formed a practical illustration of those ethical and political doctrines which he studied especially . the history reads well and impartially , and displays conscientious use of sources . the influence of the author 's military experience shows itself in certain portions of the narrative . tired of teaching , he resigned his professorship in 1785 , and devoted himself to the revision of his lectures , which he published ( 1792 ) under the title of principles of moral and political science . in his seventieth year , ferguson , intending to prepare a new edition of the history , visited italy and some of the principal cities of europe , where he was received with honour by learned societies . from 1795 he resided successively at neidpath castle near peebles , at hallyards on manor water , and at st andrews , where he died on 22 february 1816 . he is buried in the churchyard of st andrews cathedral , against the east wall . his large mural monument includes a carved profile portrait in marble . ethics . in his ethical system ferguson treats man as a social being , illustrating his doctrines by political examples . as a believer in the progression of the human race , he placed the principle of moral approbation in the attainment of perfection . victor cousin criticised ferguson 's speculations ( see his cours d'histoire de la philosophie morale an dix-huitième siècle , pt . ii . , 1839–1840 ) : we find in his method the wisdom and circumspection of the scottish school , with something more masculine and decisive in the results . the principle of perfection is a new one , at once more rational and comprehensive than benevolence and sympathy , which in our view places ferguson as a moralist above all his predecessors . by this principle ferguson attempted to reconcile all moral systems . with thomas hobbes and hume he admits the power of self-interest or utility , and makes it enter into morals as the law of self-preservation . francis hutcheson 's theory of universal benevolence and adam smith 's idea of mutual sympathy ( now empathy ) he combines under the law of society . but , as these laws appear as the means rather than the end of human destiny , they remain subordinate to a supreme end , and the supreme end of perfection . in the political part of his system ferguson follows montesquieu , and pleads the cause of well-regulated liberty and free government . his contemporaries , with the exception of hume , regarded his writings as of great importance ( see sir leslie stephen , english thought in the eighteenth century , cambridge university press , 2011 , p . & nbsp ; 214 ) . social thought . ferguson 's an essay on the history of civil society ( 1767 ) drew on classical authors and contemporary travel literature , to analyze modern commercial society with a critique of its abandonment of civic and communal virtues . central themes in ferguson 's theory of citizenship are conflict , play , political participation and military valor . he emphasized the ability to put oneself in another 's shoes , saying '' fellow-feeling '' was so much an '' appurtenance of human nature '' as to be a '' characteristic of the species . '' like his friends adam smith and david hume as well as other scottish intellectuals , he stressed the importance of the spontaneous order ; that is , that coherent and even effective outcomes might result from the uncoordinated actions of many individuals . ferguson saw history as a two-tiered synthesis of natural history and social history , to which all humans belong . natural history is created by god ; so are humans , who are progressive . social history is , in accordance with this natural progress , made by humans , and because of that factor it experiences occasional setbacks . but in general , humans are empowered by god to pursue progress in social history . humans live not for themselves but for god 's providential plan . he emphasized aspects of medieval chivalry as ideal masculine characteristics . british gentleman and young men were advised to dispense with aspects of politeness considered too feminine , such as the constant desire to please , and to adopt less superficial qualities that suggested inner virtue and courtesy toward the 'fairer sex . ' kettler , the social and political thought of adam ferguson ( 1965 ) herman , a . , the scottish enlightenment , harper perennial ferguson was a leading advocate of the idea of progress . he believed that the growth of a commercial society through the pursuit of individual self-interest could promote a self-sustaining progress . yet paradoxically ferguson also believed that such commercial growth could foster a decline in virtue and thus ultimately lead to a collapse similar to rome 's . ferguson , a devout presbyterian , resolved the apparent paradox by placing both developments in the context of a divinely ordained plan that mandated both progress and human free will . for ferguson , the knowledge that humanity gains through its actions , even those actions resulting in temporary retrogression , form an intrinsic part of its progressive , asymptotic movement toward an ultimately unobtainable perfectibility . hill ( 1997 ) ferguson was influenced by classical humanism and such writers as tacitus , niccolò machiavelli , and thomas hobbes . the fellow members of edinburgh 's select society , which included david hume and adam smith , were also major influences . ferguson believed that civilization is largely about laws that restrict our independence as individuals but provide liberty in the sense of security and justice . he warned that social chaos usually leads to despotism . the members of civil society give up their liberty-as-autonomy , which savages possess , in exchange for liberty-as-security , or civil liberty . montesquieu used a similar argument . smith emphasized capital accumulation as the driver of growth , but ferguson suggested innovation and technical advance were more important , and he is therefore in some ways more in line with modern thinking . according to smith , commerce tends to make men 'dastardly ' . this foreshadows a theme ferguson , borrowing freely from smith , took up to criticize capitalism . ferguson 's critique of commercial society went far beyond that of smith , and influenced hegel and marx . the essay has been seen as an innovative attempt to reclaim the tradition of civic republican citizenship in modern britain , and an influence on the ideas of republicanism held by the american founding fathers . . family . he married katherine burnett in 1767 . ferguson was first cousin , close friend and colleague to joseph black and katie burnett was black 's niece . records of the clan and name ferguson 1895 page.138 note . 1 accessed 22 december 2018 they produced seven children the eldest adam ferguson ( british army officer ) close friend to sir walter scott , followed by james , joseph , john , isabella , mary and margaret . records of the clan and name of fergusson by d douglas 1895 p.144 . main works . an essay on the history of civil society ( 1767 ) reprinted in 1995 with a new introduction by louis schneider . transaction publishers , london , 1995 . the history of the progress and termination of the roman republic ( 1783 ) principles of moral and political science ; being chiefly a retrospect of lectures delivered in the college of edinburgh ( 1792 ) institutes of moral philosophy ( 1769 ) reflections previous to the establishment of a militia ( 1756 ) . references . . sources . articles in dictionary of national biography hill , lisa . '' adam ferguson and the paradox of progress and decline , '' history of political thought 1997 18 ( 4 ) : 677–706 kettler , david adam ferguson : his social and political thought . new brunswick : transaction , 2005 . mcdaniel , iain . adam ferguson in the scottish enlightenment : the roman past and europe 's future ( harvard university press ; 2013 ) 276 pages james mccosh , the scottish philosophy , biographical , expository , critical , from hutcheson to hamilton ( 1875 ) oz-salzberger , fania . '' introduction '' in adam ferguson , an essay on the history of civil society , edited by f . oz-salzberger , cambridge : cambridge university press , 1995 oz-salzberger , fania . translating the enlightenment : scottish civic discourse in eighteenth-century germany , ( oxford : clarendon press , 1995 ) vileisis , danga : der unbekannte beitrag adam fergusons zum materialistischen geschichtsverständnis von karl marx . in : beiträge zur marx-engels-forschung . neue folge 2009 . argument verlag , hamburg 2010 , s . 7-60 '' adam ferguson '' routledge encyclopedia of philosophy 1998 . further reading . broadie , alexander , ed . the scottish enlightenment : an anthology ( 2001 ) . external links . an essay on the history of civil society adam ferguson at the online library of liberty notes on ferguson 's moral philosophy lectures + various publications