Deprecation

etymology . in general english usage , the infinitive '' to deprecate '' means '' to express disapproval of ( something ) '' . it derives from the latin verb deprecare , meaning '' to ward off ( a disaster ) by prayer '' . in current technical usage , for one to state that a feature is deprecated is merely a recommendation against using it . it is still possible to produce a program or product without heeding the deprecation . software . while a deprecated software feature remains in the software , its use may raise warning messages recommending alternative practices . deprecated status may also indicate the feature will be removed in the future . features are deprecated , rather than immediately removed , to provide backward compatibility and to give programmers time to bring affected code into compliance with the new standard . among the most common reasons for deprecation are : the feature has been replaced by a more powerful alternative feature . for instance , the linux kernel contains two modules to communicate with windows networks : smbfs and cifs . the latter provides better security , supports more protocol features , and integrates better with the rest of the kernel . since the inclusion of cifs , smbfs has been deprecated . the feature contains a design flaw , frequently a security flaw , and so should be avoided , but existing code depends upon it . the simple c standard function gets ( ) is an example , because using this function can introduce a buffer overflow into the program that uses it . the java api methods thread.stop , . suspend and . resume are further examples . the feature is considered extraneous , and will be removed in the future in order to simplify the system as a whole . early versions of the web markup language html included a font element to allow page designers to specify the font in which text should be displayed . with the release of cascading style sheets and html 4.0 , the font element became extraneous , and detracted from the benefits of noting structural markup in html and graphical formatting in css . thus , the font element was deprecated in the transitional html 4.0 standard , and eliminated in the strict variant . a future version of the software will make major structural changes , making it impossible ( or impractical ) to support older features . for instance , when apple inc . planned the transition from mac os 9 to mac os x , it created a subset of the older system 's api which would support most programs with minor changes : the carbon library ( that has since been deprecated ) , available in both mac os 9 and mac os x . programmers who were , at the time , chiefly using mac os 9 , could ensure that their programs would run natively on mac os x by using only the api functions supported in carbon . other mac os 9 functions were deprecated , and were never supported natively in mac os x . standardization or increased consistency in naming . projects that are developed over long periods of time , or by multiple individuals or groups , can contain inconsistencies in the naming of various items . these might result from a lack of foresight , changes in nomenclature over time , or personal , regional , or educational differences in terminology . since merely renaming an item would break backwards compatibility , the existing name must be left in place . the original name will likely remain indefinitely , but will be deprecated to encourage use of the newer , more consistent naming convention . an example would be an api that alternately used the spelling '' color '' and '' colour '' . standardization would result in the use of only one of the regional spellings throughout , and all occurrences of the other spelling would be deprecated . a feature that once was available only independently is now combined with its co-feature . an example is vlc media player ; vlc used to stand for '' videolan client '' , and a separate '' videolan server '' was available as its co-feature . both the client and server became available in the same package and so getting one independently would be impractical . other usage . an example in hardware design is omission of pull-up resistors on unused inputs to a logic gate . this practice may have been acceptable in the past , but has become deprecated because faster clock speeds are likely to induce more transient noise on input lines , causing hardware glitches or malfunctions . a building code example is the use of ungrounded ( '' 2-prong '' ) electrical receptacles . over time , these older devices were widely deprecated in favor of safer grounded ( '' 3-prong '' ) receptacles . the older , ungrounded receptacles were still permitted in many places by '' grandfathering '' them in existing electrical wiring , while prohibiting them for new installations . thus , though ungrounded receptacles may still be available for legal purchase in a location where they are obsolete , they would generally be intended only for repairs to existing older electrical installations . in writing and editing , usage of a word may be deprecated because it is ambiguous , confusing , or offensive to some readers . for example , the words sanction and inflammable may be misinterpreted because they have auto-antonymic or self-contradictory meanings ; writing style guides often recommend substituting other words that are clearly understood and unambiguous . some word usages that have acquired different connotations over time , such as gay or colored , may be deprecated as obsolete in formal writing . in technical standards , use of a certain clause may be discouraged or superseded by new clauses . as an example , in the ethernet standard ieee 802.3-2012 , clause 5 ( layer management ) is '' deprecated '' by clause 30 ( management ) , except for 5.2.4 . the term deprecated may also be used when a technical term becomes obsolete , either through change or supersession . an example from paleontology is the previously deprecated term brontosaurus ; before being re-recognized as a unique genus , brontosaurus finally validated as a distinct dinosaur it was considered a popular , yet deprecated , name for the genus apatosaurus . some examples of deprecated terms from medicine include consumption ( tuberculosis ) , grippe ( influenza ) , and apoplexy ( stroke ) . in chemistry , the international standards organization iupac ( international union of pure and applied chemistry ) has deprecated the term '' methyl ethyl ketone '' , and now recommends using the term '' ethyl methyl ketone '' instead . . see also . abandonware list of deprecated terms for diseases obsolescence orphaned technology . references . external links . how and when to deprecate apis from the jdk 5.0 documentation detect deprecated functions a tool that discovers deprecated functions in any windows native application or library .