Stratford-upon-Avon Canal

route . the stratford-upon-avon canal connects the worcester and birmingham canal at kings norton to the river avon at stratford-upon-avon in warwickshire . it consists of two sections , divided by a junction which connects it to the grand union canal . the northern section from kings norton in the suburbs of birmingham to lapworth is level for the first , following the birmingham level , but then descends quite rapidly through the lapworth flight of 18 locks , to reach the junction . there is a choice of route to reach the grand union , as there are two locks side by side , one on the main line of the canal , and one on the branch , but a channel joins the bottom ends of both locks . the junction is almost exactly halfway along the canal . the southern section continues the descent with the final seven of the lapworth locks , passing under the m40 motorway just before the final one . the locks are closely spaced until those at preston bagot are reached , after which there is a section with just one lock in the middle . this nearly-level section contains two of the canal 's three iron aqueducts . the easy cruising is interrupted by the wilmcote flight of eleven locks in just over a mile ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) , soon after which the canal reaches stratford-upon-avon . along the route of the canal , there are a total of 54 narrow locks . near king 's norton junction there is a disused stop lock , which used to prevent the canal taking water from the worcester and birmingham canal when they were separately owned , but is now left permanently open . it is unusual in that it has two guillotine gates which are made of wood . when operational , they moved vertically in iron frames , and were counterbalanced by weights . a barge lock connects the terminal basin ( bancroft basin formerly the bank croft , a piece of common land by the river used as pasture : ) with the river avon . earlswood lakes in earlswood are feeder reservoirs to the canal . the three lakes were built between 1821 and 1822 and have a total capacity of 210 million gallons ( 950 megalitres ( ml ) ) . the lakes consist of three separate pools ; terry 's , engine and windmill pool . they are retained by earth embankment . until 1936 the water was pumped into the feeder by a beam engine , whose engine house can still be seen . the feeder was navigable for coal boats to reach the engine house and is now used for moorings . features . from kings norton junction at the northern end the canal immediately passes through the unusual king 's norton stop lock , the only guillotine lock stop-lock on a canal . after 3/4 mile is the only tunnel on the canal , at brandwood . it is long , and like many canal tunnels it has no towpath ; horses were walked over the hill and barges were pulled through the tunnel using a handrail on the wall of the tunnel , parts of which can still be seen . on the outskirts of shirley the brick-built major 's green aqueduct carries the canal 10m above aqueduct road and the river cole . further south is the electrically operated shirley draw bridge which carries drawbridge road over the canal . it is normally closed and can be opened using a british waterways key . the northern section also has a swing bridge ( no.2 , normally left open ) , a lift bridge ( no.28 ) , and another drawbridge ( no . 26 ) , all operated manually . on the southern section interesting features of the canal include the unique barrel-roofed lock keeper 's cottages to be found south of kingswood junction . all but two have been swamped by large modern extensions , but those at locks 28 and 31 are still in something like their original state , neither of them have either electricity supply or mains water . many of the accommodation bridges south of kingswood junction are split bridges of cast iron , with a central slot to accommodate the tow rope of horse-drawn boats . the southern section of the canal passes over three cast iron aqueducts , unusual in that the towpaths are at the level of the canal bottom . travelling south from kingswood junction , the first aqueduct is the modest yarningale aqueduct which carries the canal over a small stream near preston bagot , warwickshire . this cast iron aqueduct was built in 1834 to replace the original wooden structure which was washed away when the stream flooded that year . the second is the wootton wawen aqueduct , just outside wootton wawen , where the canal crosses the a3400 main road . the third is the edstone aqueduct ( also known as bearley ) which at , is the longest in england . the aqueduct crosses a minor road , the birmingham and north warwickshire railway and also the trackbed of the former alcester railway . there was once a pipe from the side of the canal that enabled locomotives to draw water to fill the locomotives ' tanks . warwickshire railways website . history . the stratford-upon-avon canal was conceived as part of a network of canals which would allow coal from the dudley canal and the stourbridge canal to reach oxford and london , without having to use the birmingham canals , the management of which was seen as high-handed . an act was passed on 28 march 1793 for the construction of a canal from a junction with the worcester and birmingham canal in kings norton to stratford-upon-avon . the canal company was empowered to raise £120,000 by issuing shares and an additional £60,000 if required . the route would take it close to warwick and birmingham canal at lapworth , but the act did not include any provision for a direct connection with it , or with the river avon at stratford . negotiations started with the warwick and birmingham , and to second act was obtained on 19 may 1795 , to allow a connecting link to be built , despite rather unfavourable terms imposed on through traffic by the other company . josiah clowes was employed as the engineer , and construction began in november 1793 , starting at the kings norton end . he was also working on the dudley canal 's extension , and another four canal schemes at the same time , and was the first great tunnel engineer . he died in december of the following year , but work continued until the main line reached hockley heath in may 1796 , one mile ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) short of the first lock at lapworth . at this point , cutting ceased through lack of money , as the capital raised had all been spent . the dudley canal extension through the lapal tunnel was opened in early 1798 , and with progress being made on the warwick and birmingham canal , the company obtained a third act of parliament on 21 june 1799 , which allowed it to raise more money , and included a diversion of the route further to the east near lapworth , so that the length of the connecting link to the warwick and birmingham was only about . work restarted in 1799 under a new engineer called samuel porter , a former assistant of clowes . he continued as far as kingswood junction , which was formally opened on 24 may 1802 , after which cutting again ceased . . southern section . construction only recommenced in 1812 , under the leadership of william james of stratford . james , who had owned shares in the company since 1793 , had a wide interest in turnpike roads and railways , and following a tour of the north of england between 1802 and 1804 , on which he investigated railways and canals , he expanded his business interests to include coal mining . he rose to become chairman of the canal company , and personally bought the upper avon navigation in 1813 . he wanted to create a through route between the river severn and the midlands , and so the canal company obtained a further act of parliament on 12 may 1815 , which authorised a connection between the canal and the avon at stratford , as well as enabling them to build reservoirs at earlswood . the canal reached stratford in june 1816 and a connection with the river avon was made . the total cost of the canal had been around £297,000 . the southern section of the canal never realised james ' ambitions , as the upper avon was too tortuous and prone to floods to be a reliable through route . he spent some £6,000 on improvements to the upper avon locks in 1822 , but over-reached himself , and was declared bankrupt shortly afterwards . for a while the upper river was managed by a syndicate of seven people , all connected with the canal , and the canal company took out a lease of it from 1842 for five years . trade was mainly coal , which was conveyed from stratford to evesham . traffic steadily built up , although tolls were low , to offset the costs imposed on goods passing through kingswood junction to the warwick and birmingham canal . on the southern section , coal was taken to stratford , from where it was sold , or passed along the upper avon or the stratford and moreton tramway . modest dividends were paid to shareholders from 1824 , and the total traffic carried in 1838 was 181,708 tons , on which profits of £6,835 were made . in 1845 , the company agreed to sell the canal to the oxford , worcester and wolverhampton railway , who were also keen to purchase the stratford and moreton tramway . it was not until january 1856 that the transaction was finally completed , and another year before the railway company took over day-to-day running . another change of ownership occurred in 1863 , when the railway company was absorbed by the great western railway . traffic gradually decreased , but the fall in receipts was faster than the fall in tonnage , as the railway took the long-distance loads . . decline and restoration . by the late 1930s the southern section had become derelict , although a water supply was maintained , which the gwr used to supply its engine shed in stratford . the northern section was never officially closed , but traffic had virtually ceased by 1939 . it was blocked when bridge no . 2 , the tunnel lane lift bridge at lifford , became faulty , and was replaced by the gwr with a fixed bridge which left insufficient height for a boat to pass . after lord methuen raised the issue in the house of lords in 1947 , and was assured that the bridge '' would be lifted at any time on notice of intended passage being given '' , tom rolt of the inland waterways association ( iwa ) announced that he intended to pass under the bridge on 20 may 1947 . despite difficulties with the state of the canal , and the fact that the accompanying boat provided by the gwr got stuck , the bridge was reached . it had been jacked up and was resting on heavy timbers . robert aickman , another of the founders of the iwa , had organised press coverage , and the story was reported in the national newspapers . iwa members were then encouraged to use the route . eric de mare repeated the exercise in 1948 , using a converted army pontoon . a horse-drawn ice breaker was used to create a channel through the weed on this occasion , and the following year , peter scott asked for the bridge to be lifted . in 1950 , the bridge , which had become known as lifford bridge , or lifford lane bridge , was replaced with a working swing bridge . the northern section of the canal was saved from dereliction by such pioneering efforts . the bridge has now been removed altogether . by the 1950s , the southern section was un-navigable by canal boats , as several of the locks could not be operated , and some of the small pounds between the locks of the wilmcote flight were dry . problems with a bridge also began the process of restoring this section . warwickshire county council sought to obtain legal abandonment of the canal in 1958 , as they wished to replace bridge 59 at wilmcote without the expense of providing navigable headroom . a campaign against closure was mounted by the inland waterways association and local activists . two canoeists , who had used the canal recently , produced a dated toll ticket for their journey , which was offered as proof that the canal was not disused . retention of the canal was announced on 22 may 1959 , and by 16 october , the british transport commission and the national trust reported that they had agreed on the terms of a lease , under which the national trust would be responsible for the restoration and maintenance of the southern section . the transfer of responsibility took place on 29 september 1960 , and work began in march 1961 . although the transport commission made a contribution towards the cost , the national trust raised most of the £42,000 required to put it back into good order . the project was managed by david hutchings , who pioneered the use of voluntary labour , which would be used on many subsequent restorations , and assistance was also given by prisoners from winson green prison , the army and the raf airfield construction branch . the canal was fully navigable by mid-1964 , and elizabeth bowes-lyon officially re-opened it on 11 july . its restoration was a turning point for the waterways movement in britain . the national trust charged a private toll fee for navigation . ten years after the re-opening , the queen mother performed the same ceremony for the upper avon navigation , which had been derelict for more than a century , and the canal became part of a through route to the river severn once more . in 1986 , the national trust indicated that they would like to hand control of the canal back to the british waterways board , and held discussions on 7 october 1986 . the canal was transferred on 1 april 1988 , authorised by an order of the secretary of state , which provided £1.5 million , phased over five years , to enable the canal to be brought up to standard . . points of interest . see also . stratford and moreton tramway avon ring . bibliography . . references .