Team roping

origins . cowboys originally developed this technique on working ranches when it was necessary to capture and restrain a full-grown animal that was too large to handle by a single man . over the years , as the sport has grown , a numbering system was added to rate each ropers individual talent level . the numbers go from one to nine ( 1-9 ) for headers and one to ten ( 1-10 ) for heelers . using these numbers , a handicap systems ( the subtraction of time ) has been developed to even the competition . today there are tens of thousands of amateur ropers who compete for millions of dollars in prize money . . equipment . there is specialized equipment used by team ropers : rope - made of synthetic fibers , used to rope the steer , there are two kinds of ropes , one for the header ( the person who ropes the head ) and one for the heeler ( the person who ropes the legs ) . the header 's rope is usually 30 to 32 feet in length and is a lot softer ( softer means the rope has more elasticity and flexibility ) . the heeler 's rope is usually 35 or 36 feet in length and is a lot stiffer ( meaning it contains less flexibility and is more rigid to catch the feet ) . horn wraps - protective wraps that go around the horns of the steer to prevent rope burns and reduce the risk of a horn breaking when roped . roping gloves - worn to prevent rope burns on the hands of the riders . western saddle - roping saddles have a particularly strong design with double rigging and other specialized features , including a rubber wrap around the saddle horn to keep the dally from slipping , and usually a wooden rawhide-covered saddle tree or a reinforced fiberglass tree . bell boots and splint boots are placed on the horses ' legs for protection . modern event . steers used for roping are moved from a holding corral through a series of narrow alleyways that lead to the roping arena . the alleyways allow the steers to be lined up in single file . then , one at a time , a steer is moved into a chute with spring-loaded doors in front and a solid gate behind , so that only one animal is released at a time . on each side of the chute is an area called the box that is big enough to hold a horse and rider . the header is on one side ( usually the left , for a right-handed header ) whose job is to rope the steer around the horns , then turn the steer so its hind legs can be roped by the '' heeler '' , who starts from the box on the other side of the chute . a taut rope , called the barrier , runs in front of the header 's box and is fastened to an easily released rope on the neck of the steer of a designated length , used to ensure that the steer gets a head start . an electronic barrier , consisting of an electric eye connected to a timing device , is sometimes used in place of the barrier rope . when the header is ready , he or she calls for the steer and an assistant pulls a lever , opening the chute doors . the freed steer breaks out running . when the steer reaches the end of the rope , the barrier releases . the header must rope the steer with one of three legal catches : a clean horn catch around both horns , a neck catch around the neck or a half-head catch around the neck and one horn . the header then takes a dally , a couple of wraps of the rope around the horn of the saddle . some ropers have lost fingers in this event . once the header has made the dally , the rider turns the horse , usually to the left , and the steer will follow , still running . the heeler waits until the header has turned the steer . when he or she has a clear throw , the heeler throws a loop of rope under the running steer 's hind legs and catches them . as soon as the heeler also dallies tight , the header turns his or her horse to directly face the steer and heeler . both horses back up slightly to stretch out the steer 's hind legs , immobilizing the animal . as soon as the steer is stretched out , an official waves a flag and the time is taken . the steer is released and trots off . there is a 5-second penalty for roping only one hind leg and a 10-second penalty for breaking the barrier if both occur on the same run then the penalties are added together for a total of 15 seconds added . a successful professional-level team takes between 4 and 8 seconds to stretch the steer , depending on the length of the arena . at lower levels , a team may take longer , particularly if the heeler misses the first throw and has to try again . at higher levels , the header and the heeler are allowed only one throw each , if either misses , the team gets no score . in some round-robin format competitions the header and heeler are awarded points for each catch instead of timing the run . this puts emphasis on consistency rather than speed . these types of competitions are often more attractive to newer ropers where they can focus on catching rather than having a fast run . . rules . there are various organizations that sanction team roping events at local , regional and national levels . some of the rules common to most groups include : both riders must start from inside the box if the barrier is broken there is a 10-second or 5-second penalty depending on organization if the heeler catches only one leg there is a 5-second penalty the heeler can not throw unless the head of the steer is turned . the header has three possible legal catches : both horns one horn and the nose ( half-head ) the neck any other head catch is considered illegal . ropes . a modern rope is usually made of a blend of nylon and poly fibers , though some classic styles are still made of rawhide . most synthetic ropes are generally quite stiff at the time of purchase , but come in various grades . for beginners , headers start with an extra soft ( xs ) or an extra , extra soft ( xxs ) rope . heelers usually also start with a harder rope . ropes come in a number of different variations of stiffness . from softest to stiffest there is the extra extra soft ( xxs ) , extra soft ( xs ) , soft ( s ) , medium soft ( ms ) , medium ( m ) , hard medium ( hm ) , and medium hard ( mh ) . . technique . headers swing their loops overhead in a smooth , flat motion , aim for the back of the steer 's head and release the loop . when the roper releases , he or she is to stop the hand open , flat , and palm down at the point where the loop is thrown . heelers use a different technique , a right-handed heeler will twirl the loop on the left side of the rider 's body , always keeping the tip of the loop on the left side so that when the loop is thrown , it will go under the steer . heeling is all about timing ; the tip of the loop has to be at its lowest point as the steer 's legs are coming forward . the lay of the loop is also very important ; it should stand up against the steer 's legs with the bottom loop on the ground so the steer will jump right into it . . see also . rodeo steer wrestling steer roping calf roping dally ribbon roping