Stratford-upon-Avon and Midland Junction Railway

origins . the stratford-upon-avon and midland junction railway ( smjr ) was formed by the combination of four railway companies . three merged in 1909 and one joined by purchase the following year . those companies themselves had been formed with the intention of facilitating the transport of northamptonshire iron ore to south wales . the ironstone available to the south wales iron-making industries had become scarce and was of poor quality , and there was huge demand . the northamptonshire ore was not of the highest quality but it was abundantly available and conveying it to south wales was worthwhile . . the northampton and banbury junction railway . the northampton and banbury railway was authorised by act of parliament on 9 july 1847 , with the intention of connecting the ironstone fields of northamptonshire with a market for iron ore in south wales . in the first instance it was to do this by connecting from gayton wharf , near northampton , to the buckinghamshire railway , at cockley brake , near banbury , running via towcester . the buckinghamshire railway was authorised later in the same parliamentary session , by the merging of two smaller schemes from 1846 . in fact the ambitious scheme failed to raise the capital it needed to carry out its plans , and it had to obtain powers for an extension of time when the original authorisation lapsed ; the second act was passed on 28 july 1863 ; the name was changed to the northampton and banbury junction railway ( n & bjr ) . even then it was forced to content itself with a short line from blisworth , on the london and north western railway ( lnwr ) main line to towcester , opened on 1 may 1866 . it built its own station at blisworth alongside the lnwr station . the n & bjr extended its line to cockley brake , approaching banbury , on 1 june 1872 ( authorised by a further bill in 1870 ) . goods traffic had been carried as far as helmdon since august 1871 . the extension was 15 miles in length , and was constructed using very light permanent way materials , which caused difficulties later . the junction at cockley brake was over five miles from banbury , and running powers over the buckinghamshire railway were necessary to reach that place . the company was able to operate a passenger service from blisworth through towcester , wappenham , helmdon and cockley brake to banbury . it worked the line itself with second hand engines acquired from the lnwr until 1875 , from which time they were hired from that company throughout the remaining lifetime of the n & bjr . still intending to reach south wales independently , the n & bjr obtained authorisation for a further extension to blockley , gloucestershire , ( near moreton-in-marsh ) in 1865 and to ross-on-wye in 1866 . this line would have turned south-west on the approach to banbury ; the company signalled its intention by changing its name to the midland counties and south wales railway . however it quickly became obvious that these ambitious plans—96 miles of railway was contemplated at a cost of £1,250,000—were impossible to put into effect , and the company reverted to its former name . in fact the desired connecting line across the hills to chipping norton was built much later by the banbury and cheltenham direct railway , which opened on 6 april 1887 . the northampton and banbury junction railway did not generate much passenger traffic , and the train service was limited to three or four return trains daily , but cattle proved a very successful traffic as banbury cattle market grew in importance . the small scale ironstone workings around blisworth and gayton ( a mile or so south-west of blisworth on the n & bjr line ) developed in the 1880s and with the advance of mechanisation so the workings expanded considerably ; this later became an extensive site operated by richard thomas and baldwins . the east and west junction railway . the next line to be authorised was the east and west junction railway ( e & wjr ) ; it obtained its act of parliament on 23 june 1864 . it was to build a 33-mile from the northampton and banbury junction railway at green 's norton junction , a short distance west of towcester , and to continue from there , crossing the great western railway south of fenny compton , to join the stratford on avon railway at stratford-upon-avon . the railways at stratford were the stratford on avon railway northwards and the former oxford , worcester and wolverhampton railway southwards ; both were worked by the great western railway and effectively integrated with it . that was planned to give the e & wjr access both to birmingham northwards and via honeybourne south-westwards ; the authorised line included running powers over the northampton and banbury junction railway between towcester and blisworth . the huge authorised capital of £300,000 turned out to be not enough and in 1866 a further act the east and west junction railway ( capital ) act , 1866 . for another £300,000 was passed . also in the same year the company submitted a bill to extend from towcester to join the great northern railway ( gnr ) at hitchin , on condition that the gnr subscribed £200,000 . the evident objective was to create a further london connection in which the e & wjr would be a major partner . the gnr declined to make the financial commitment ; powers to extend westward to worcester were also considered , but that scheme was abandoned . obtaining parliamentary authority to raise capital was one thing , but it proved much more difficult actually to obtain the money from potential subscribers . on 1 june 1871 the first section of the line , from fenny compton to kineton , a distance of six miles , was opened and a passenger service started over that section . they hired a contractor 's engine for the purpose and later bought it , at which stage the locomotive became e & wjr no 1 . a further time extension had to be sought in parliament , and preference loans obtained to build further , but on 1 july 1873 the western ( stratford to kineton ) and eastern ( fenny compton to green 's norton junction , towcester ) ends of the line were ready , and trains ran between blisworth and stratford . between blisworth and green 's norton junction this was by running powers over the northampton and banbury junction railway . at the stratford end the company was to build its own station , but at first the gwr station , accessed by a spur connection , was used . in june 1875 the e & wjr had a temporary station of its own ready and trains were transferred to that , and they opened a permanent station in january 1876 . however , soon after the opening , a newspaper believed that the e & wjr was using its own , separate station : we hope to see the east and west junction running into the great western line at this town . every one is too familiar with the annoyances of a break in the line of communication , and travellers by the east and west junction coming from the south and desirous of proceeding to birmingham & c . , have to land at one end of stratford and journey by omnibus or car , or walk to the opposite extremity of the town , causing fatigue , anxiety , and delay . we hope some means will be used to effect a junction in the two lines , so that one station can be used , and the great western company have a station in the alcester-road , particularly accessible from the town . from this time the london and north western railway ran through carriages from london , euston to stratford via blisworth . income on the e & wjr was so poor that it fell into receivership from 29 january 1875 to 1902 . the passenger service was withdrawn from 31 july 1877 and not resumed until 2 march 1885 . binton ; opened 2 june 1879 ; closed 16 june 1947 ; bidford ; opened may 1881 ; renamed bidford-on-avon 1 july 1909 ; closed 19 february 1917 ; reopened 1 january 1919 ; closed 16 june 1947 ; the 1947 closure was stated to be temporary , owing to the fuel crisis but the station never re-opened ; broom east junction ; divergence of southwards lms spur 1942 to 1962 ; broom junction ; convergence with evesham and redditch railway northwards . stratford-upon-avon , towcester and midland junction railway towcester ; above ; stoke bruern ; nb the village is spelt stoke bruerne ; opened 1 december 1892 ; closed after last train on 30 march 1893 '' owing to intervention of easter '' ; quick ; also third supplement to quick , quoting r maund in newsletter of the railway and canal historical society chronology group , april 2012 roade junction ; spur to roade lnwr ; salcey forest ; opened 1 december 1892 ; closed after last train on 30 march 1893 '' owing to intervention of easter '' ; ravenstone wood junction ; convergence with line from northampton to bedford . quoted in quick the lines were undulating with ruling gradients of about 1 in 80 and lengthy climbs averaging 1 in 100 . there was a significant summit at tiffield between blisworth and towcester ; again approaching morton pinkney , near byfield and near fenny compton ; and at ettington lime works , a mile west of ettington station . he line to ravenstone wood junction was also undulating at 1 in 100 with a mile of 1 in 82 , and the midland railway section onward to olney fell at 1 in 75 and 1 in 70 for four miles . the cockley brake line climbed continuously to a summit a mile east of cockley brake , the final ascent being over a mile of 1 in 65 , followed by a fall of over a mile at 1 in 70 . . smjr today . today the only part of the former smjr network still open is the section between and the mod kineton . notes . references . smj history . further reading . railway magazine 1910 page 265 railway magazine 1912 page 169 railway magazine april 1933 . external links . the smj society smjr page on warwickshirerailways.com video clip at british film institute about staff retained at kineton and clifford sidings signalboxes 24 hours a day after total suspension of the train service .