Bramble

etymology . '' bramble '' comes from old english bræmbel , a variant of bræmel . it ultimately descends from proto-germanic brēm- , whence come also english broom , german , dutch and french . . description . bramble bushes have long , thorny , arching shoots and root easily . they send up long , arching canes that typically do not flower or set fruit until the second year of growth ; some varieties , known as everbearing or primocane bearing produce fruit on the tips of first-year canes . brambles usually have trifoliate or palmately-compound leaves . bramble fruits are aggregate fruits . each small unit is called a drupelet . in some , such as the blackberry , the flower receptacle is elongated and part of the ripe fruit , making the blackberry an aggregate-accessory fruit . uses . thumb many species are grown and bred for their fruit . ornamental species can be grown for flowers ( e.g . rubus trilobus ) , for their ornamental stems ( e.g . rubus cockburnianus ) and some as ground cover ( e.g . rubus tricolor ) . members of the rubus genus tend to have a brittle , porous core and an oily residue along the stalk which makes them ideal to burn , even in damp climates . the thorny varieties are sometimes grown for game cover and occasionally for protection . most species are important for their conservation and wildlife value in their native range . the flowers attract nectar-feeding butterfly and hoverflies , and are a particular favourite of volucella pellucens . brambles are important food plants for the larvae of several species of lepidoptera—see list of lepidoptera that feed on rubus . the leaves of brambles are often used as a main food source for captive phasmatodea . many birds , such as the common blackbird , and some mammals will feed on the nutritious fruits in autumn . split bramble stems are traditionally used as binding material for straw in production of lip-work basketry , such as lip-work chairs and bee skeps and sometimes used to protect other fruits such as strawberries . bramble leaves can be used to feed most phasmatodea . young leaves contain a toxin that can be harmful to many species of phasmatodea , however this only occurs up until their third instar , by which time they have developed an immunity to it . control of common blackberry . image : scythe brambles.jpg thumb right scything woodland brambles in kent , england , preparatory to poisoning emerging new spring shoots rubus fruticosus is difficult to eradicate once it has become established . early action by hand pulling with a gloved hand and digging young seedlings as soon as they are seen will save a lot of hard work later . a thick mulch of chipped bark or compost will also make it much easier to pull out recently germinated seeds in the spring . light but established infestations in friable , workable soils may be removed by cutting back the stems to about above the ground , to leave a handle , and forking out the bramble stump with as much of the root as possible . anything left below-ground may regenerate . heavy infestations may make the land completely impenetrable and will require cutting first just to access the stems . the root systems will also be so pervasive that removing them would require digging up the entire area ; doing this in woodland areas will cause unacceptable damage to the surface roots of trees and to flowering bulbs and should be avoided . in this case , chemical control using a selective weedkiller such as triclopyr to wet the photosynthesising bramble leaves is very effective if applied in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions . however , a heavily infested area of uncut brambles will require an inordinate amount of poison to wet the leaves ; it is far cheaper , and more effective , to cut the area as close to ground level as possible in the spring , clear the debris into piles to reveal the ground surface and to accurately spot spray the shoots that will emerge two to three weeks later as soon as they have a small amount of new foliage . this will kill the plant back into its root system using a small fraction of the poison required to spray whole bushes . the area may first be cleared using a tractor-mounted rotary mower , motorised string trimmer or with a scythe . a short-bladed , , scythe in good hands can be faster than using a string trimmer , leaves a neater cut close to the ground , avoids collateral damage to other plants that are desirable to keep , and deposits the cut debris aligned in swathes that are easier to remove and stack . the area must be cut and cleared at some point anyway and it is easier to clear the debris while green and flexible than dead and dry , so clearing when green then spraying a little is more efficient than spraying a lot then clearing when dry . triclopyr is highly selective : it only affects actively photosynthesising dicots , leaving grass , and flowering monocots such as narcissus and bluebell bulbs , undamaged . it also breaks down harmlessly in the soil within about six weeks leaving no toxic residuals . environmental fate of triclopyr , carissa ganapathy , environmental monitoring & pest management branch department of pesticide regulation sacramento , ca glyphosate is also effective but must be used with much greater care and will damage other woodland plants . cultivation . thumb there are many different systems developed for the commercial culture of blackberries and raspberries . bramble cultivars are separated into several categories based on their growth habit . they are categorised as erect , semi-erect , or trailing . plants bearing thorns , brambles , spines , or prickles are often used as a defence against burglary , being strategically planted below windows or around the entire perimeter of a property . marcus felson , crime and nature ( 2006 ) , p . 288 . they also have been used to protect crops and livestock against marauding animals . examples include hawthorn hedges in europe , agaves in the americas and in other countries where they have been introduced , osage orange in the prairie states of the us , and sansevieria in africa . hunter , j . a . , '' hunter '' publisher : buccaneer books , 1993 , . in human culture . the book of genesis recounts the creation of thorns as one of the punishments for the original sin of adam and eve , stating , '' thorns also and thistles shall the ground bring forth to thee ; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field . '' an early popular myth involving a thorn is that of androcles , a fugitive slave in ancient greece who was said to have befriended a lion by pulling a thorn from the lion 's paw . carrington , norman t . , shaw , george bernard . androcles and the lion : brodies notes . publisher : macmillan , 1976 , in sleeping beauty , a fairy summons a forest of trees , brambles and thorns that spring up around a castle , shielding it from the outside world and preventing anyone from disturbing the princess . a prince then braves the tall trees , brambles and thorns which part at his approach , and enters the castle . bottigheimer , ruth . ( 2008 ) . '' before contes du temps passe ( 1697 ) : charles perrault 's griselidis , souhaits and peau '' . the romantic review , volume 99 , number 3 . pp . 175–189 . the child ballad the maid freed from the gallows compares the heroine 's plight to being caught in '' the briery bush '' or '' the prickly bush , '' in many variants , resulting in an alternative title of '' the briery bush . ''