Gilbert Sheldon

early life . sheldon was born in stanton , staffordshire in the parish of ellastone , on 19 june 1598 , ( according to an entry in sheldon 's family bible , now in the bodleian library , oxford , which states in handwriting , 'gilb . sheldon , borne 19 june 1598 . ' ) , the youngest son of roger sheldon ; his father worked for gilbert talbot , 7th earl of shrewsbury . he was educated at trinity college , oxford ; he matriculated at oxford on 1 july 1614 , graduated ba from trinity college on 27 november 1617 , and ma ( oxon ) on 28 june 1620 . in 1619 he was incorporated at cambridge . in 1622 he was elected fellow of all souls ' college , where he took the degrees of bd on 11 november 1628 and dd on 25 june 1634 . in 1622 he was ordained , and shortly afterwards he became domestic chaplain to thomas coventry , 1st baron coventry . in march 1636 he was elected warden of all souls ' on the death of richard astley . 'astley , richard ' , in j . foster ( ed . ) , alumni oxonienses 1500-1714 ( oxford , 1891 ) , pp . 29–50 ( british history online , accessed 22 november 2018 ) . 'sheldon , gilbert ' in j . venn , alumni cantabrigienses part i vol . 4 ( cambridge university press 1927 ) , p . 57 ( internet archive ) . he had already made the acquaintance of william laud , and corresponded with him on college business , university politics , and on the conversion of william chillingworth from roman catholicism . sheldon was not initially a laudian , and he resisted ( unsuccessfully ) laud 's appointment of jeremy taylor to a fellowship at all souls ' . in 1634 and 1640 he was pro-vice-chancellor . in 1638 he was on the commission of visitation for merton college ; the visit produced a report requiring reforms . during the years 1632–1639 he received the livings of hackney ( 1633 ) ; oddington , oxfordshire ; ickford , buckinghamshire ( 1636 ) ; and newington , oxfordshire ; besides being a prebendary of gloucester from 1632 . sheldon gravitated towards the great tew circle of lucius cary ( falkland ) , and was on friendly terms with edward hyde ; he had no puritan sympathies . he became a royal chaplain through coventry , and the king intended preferment for him , plans interrupted by the political crises . . civil war period . he was intimate with the royalist leaders , and participated in the negotiations for the uxbridge treaty of 1645 . during this period he became with henry hammond one of the churchmen closest to the king , and attended him as clerk of the closet in oxford , later in newmarket , suffolk and finally in the isle of wight . when the parliamentarians occupied oxford in 1646 he resisted the visitation , but was finally and physically ejected from all souls in early 1648 . taken into custody , he was to have been imprisoned in wallingford castle with hammond but the commander was unwilling to have them . he was freed , with restrictions on his movements , later that year . he lived quietly for a dozen years in the midlands , at snelston in derbyshire or with friends in staffordshire and nottinghamshire . he was active in fundraising for the poor clergy and for charles ii in exile . he corresponded with jeremy taylor , whom he supported , and with hyde . on the death of john palmer , whom the visitors had made warden of all souls ' in his place , on 4 march 1659 , he was quietly reinstated . . bishop of london . on 21 september 1660 , sheldon was nominated bishop of london ; he was elected on 9 october and his election confirmed on 23 october . on 28 october , he was consecrated in the henry vii chapel at westminster abbey ; he had been made dean of the chapel royal not long before and became master of the savoy not long after . since william juxon was now archbishop of canterbury , but was aged and infirm , sheldon in practical terms exercised many of the powers of the archbishopric in the period to 1663 , and he was on the privy council . he was commissioned to consecrate the new scottish bishops . the savoy conference of 1661 was held at his lodgings . he hardly participated , but was understood to be pulling strings in terms of the outcome . in his formulation , puritan objections should be set out and considered ; the point of the conference was liturgical , to look into reform of the book of common prayer . the subsequent uniformity act 1662 was very much in line with sheldon 's thinking . the act was a sequel to sheldon 's successful orchestration of opposition to charles ii 's intended declaration of indulgence , earlier in 1662 . ronald h . fritze , william b . robison , historical dictionary of stuart england , 1603–1689 ( 1996 ) , p . 492 . archbishop of canterbury . he was translated to become archbishop of canterbury in 1663 : the congé d'élire was issued on 14 july , sheldon was elected on 11 august , royal assent was given on 20 august and his election was confirmed ( in a legal ceremony by which he officially took his new post ) on 31 august at lambeth palace ; the bishops present to confirm sheldon 's election were : george morley , bishop of winchester ; william piers , bishop of bath and wells ; robert skinner , bishop of oxford ; humphrey henchman , bishop of salisbury ; seth ward , bishop of exeter ; and john earle , bishop of worcester . lambeth palace library research guide – places of confirmation of election of archbishops of canterbury ( accessed 31 july 2013 ) he was enthroned by proxy and vested with the temporalities on 7 september . ( accessed 31 july 2013 ) he was greatly interested in the welfare of the university of oxford , of which he became chancellor in 1667 , succeeding lord clarendon , as hyde now was . the sheldonian theatre at oxford was built and endowed at his expense . he was elected a fellow of the royal society in 1665 . he accepted much purely secular work , acting as arbiter on petitions presented through him , and taking up investigations passed on by the king , especially in connection with the navy . sheldon lost political influence after the fall of clarendon in 1667 , and by making charles 's philandering a matter of religious reproach . he was vocal against the royal declaration of indulgence of 1672 . he is depicted in a window in gray 's inn chapel . sheldon is mentioned in pepys ' diary who relates a story from his '' cozen roger '' that '' . the archbishop of canterbury that now is , do keep a wench , and that he is a very wencher as can be and tells us that is publicly known that sir charles sedley had got away one of the archbishop 's wenches from him . '' such stories , spread by his enemies , were common . there is in fact no credible evidence that sheldon led an immoral life , though samuel pepys 's cousin roger pepys , a puritan , may well have believed the gossip . a later entry in pepys ' diary praises the archbishop as a '' stout and high spirited man '' , who openly spoke his mind to the king on matters of morality . sheldon never married : this may have inspired the gossip reported by pepys about his immoral private life . his niece , catherine , married john dolben , archbishop of york . sheldon was buried in croydon parish church , now renamed croydon minster . notes . . references . sources . . further reading . victor d . sutch ( 1973 ) , gilbert sheldon , architect of anglican survival 1640–1675 -