Cold cathode

cold-cathode devices . image : zm1210-operating edit2.jpg thumb upright the stacked digit arrangement in a nixie tube is visible here a cold-cathode vacuum tube does not rely on external heating of an electrode to provide thermionic emission of electrons . early cold-cathode devices included the geissler tube and plucker tube , and early cathode ray tubes . study of the phenomena in these devices led to the discovery of the electron . neon lamps are used both to produce light as indicators and for special-purpose illumination , and also as circuit elements displaying negative resistance . addition of a trigger electrode to a device allowed the glow discharge to be initiated by an external control circuit ; bell laboratories developed a '' trigger tube '' cold-cathode device in 1936 . d . m . neale , cold cathode tube circuit design , francis and taylor , 1964 . pp . 1–7 . many types of cold-cathode switching tube were developed , including various types of thyratron , the krytron , cold-cathode displays ( nixie tube ) and others . voltage regulator tubes rely on the relatively constant voltage of a glow discharge over a range of current and were used to stabilize power-supply voltages in tube-based instruments . a dekatron is a cold-cathode tube with multiple electrodes that is used for counting . each time a pulse is applied to a control electrode , a glow discharge moves to a step electrode ; by providing ten electrodes in each tube and cascading the tubes , a counter system can be developed and the count observed by the position of the glow discharges . counter tubes were used widely before development of integrated circuit counter devices . the flash tube is a cold-cathode device filled with xenon gas , used to produce an intense short pulse of light for photography or to act as a stroboscope to examine the motion of moving parts . lamps . cold-cathode lamps include cold-cathode fluorescent lamps ( ccfls ) and neon lamps . neon lamps primarily rely on excitation of gas molecules to emit light ; ccfls use a discharge in mercury vapor to develop ultraviolet light , which in turn causes a fluorescent coating on the inside of the lamp to emit visible light . cold-cathode fluorescent lamps were used for backlighting of lcds , for example computer monitors and television screens . in the lighting industry , “ cold cathode ” historically refers to luminous tubing larger than 20 & nbsp ; mm in diameter and operating on a current of 120 to 240 milliamperes . this larger-diameter tubing is often used for interior alcove and general lighting . the term '' neon lamp '' refers to tubing that is smaller than 15 & nbsp ; mm in diameter and typically operates at approximately 40 milliamperes . these lamps are commonly used for neon signs . details . the cathode is the negative electrode . any gas-discharge lamp has a positive ( anode ) and a negative electrode . both electrodes alternate between acting as an anode and a cathode when these devices run with alternating current . a cold cathode is distinguished from a hot cathode that is heated to induce thermionic emission of electrons . discharge tubes with hot cathodes have an envelope filled with low-pressure gas and containing two electrodes . examples are most common fluorescent lamps , high-pressure discharge lamps and vacuum fluorescent displays . the surface of cold cathodes can emit secondary electrons at a ratio greater than unity ( breakdown ) . an electron that leaves the cathode will collide with neutral gas molecules . the collision may just excite the molecule , but sometimes it will knock an electron free to create a positive ion . the original electron and the freed electron continue toward the anode and may create more positive ions ( see townsend avalanche ) . the result is for each electron that leaves the cathode , several positive ions are generated that eventually crash onto the cathode . some crashing positive ions may generate a secondary electron . the discharge is self-sustaining when for each electron that leaves the cathode , enough positive ions hit the cathode to free , on average , another electron . external circuitry limits the discharge current . cold-cathode discharge lamps use higher voltages than hot-cathode ones . the resulting strong electric field near the cathode accelerates ions to a sufficient velocity to create free electrons from the cathode material . another mechanism to generate free electrons from a cold metallic surface is field electron emission . it is used in some x-ray tubes , the field-emission microscopy ( fem ) , and field-emission displays ( feds ) . cold cathodes sometimes have a rare-earth coating to enhance electron emission . some types contain a source of beta radiation to start ionization of the gas that fills the tube . , discharge tube . in some tubes , glow discharge around the cathode is usually minimized ; instead there is a so-called positive column , filling the tube . , electron emissive electrode . , gaseous-conduction lamp . positive column is part of a glow discharge , such as in the moore lamp . examples are the neon lamp and nixie tubes . nixie tubes too are cold-cathode neon displays that are in-line , but not in-plane , display devices . cold-cathode devices typically use a complex high-voltage power supply with some mechanism for limiting current . although creating the initial space charge and the first arc of current through the tube may require a very high voltage , once the tube begins to heat up , the electrical resistance drops , thus increasing the electric current through the lamp . to offset this effect and maintain normal operation , the supply voltage is gradually lowered . in the case of tubes with an ionizing gas , the gas can become a very hot plasma , and electrical resistance is greatly reduced . if operated from a simple power supply without current limiting , this reduction in resistance would lead to damage to the power supply and overheating of the tube electrodes . applications . cold cathodes are used in cold-cathode rectifiers , such as the crossatron and mercury-arc valves , and cold-cathode amplifiers , such as in automatic message accounting and other pseudospark switching applications . other examples include the thyratron , krytron , sprytron , and ignitron tubes . a common cold-cathode application is in neon signs and other locations where the ambient temperature is likely to drop well below freezing , the clock tower , palace of westminster ( big ben ) uses cold-cathode lighting behind the clock faces where continual striking and failure to strike in cold weather would be undesirable . large cold-cathode fluorescent lamps ( ccfls ) have been produced in the past and are still used today when shaped , long-life linear light sources are required . , miniature ccfls were extensively used as backlights for computer and television liquid-crystal displays . ccfl lifespans vary in lcd televisions depending on transient voltage surges and temperature levels in usage environments . due to its efficiency , ccfl technology has expanded into room lighting . costs are similar to those of traditional fluorescent lighting , but with several advantages : the light emitted is , bulbs turn on instantly to full output and are also dimmable . solé lighting ( commercial site advocating ccfls ) . . effects of internal heating . in systems using alternating current but without separate anode structures , the electrodes alternate as anodes and cathodes , and the impinging electrons can cause substantial localized heating , often to red heat . the electrode may take advantage of this heating to facilitate the thermionic emission of electrons when it is acting as a cathode . ( instant-start fluorescent lamps employ this aspect ; they start as cold-cathode devices , but soon localized heating of the fine tungsten-wire cathodes causes them to operate in the same mode as hot-cathode lamps . ) this aspect is problematic in the case of backlights used for lcd tv displays . new energy-efficiency regulations being proposed in many countries will require variable backlighting ; variable backlightling also improves the perceived contrast range , which is desirable for lcd tv sets . however , ccfls are strictly limited in the degree to which they can be dimmed , both because a lower plasma current will lower the temperature of the cathode , causing erratic operation , and because running the cathode at too low a temperature drastically shortens the life of the lamps . much research is being directed to this problem , but high-end manufacturers are now turning to high-efficiency white leds as a better solution . see also . ccfl inverter ( or resonance transformer ) . references and notes . notes .