Astrological aspect

approach . in medieval astrology , certain aspects , like certain planets , were considered to be either favorable ( benefic ) or unfavorable ( malefic ) . modern usage places less emphasis on these fatalistic distinctions . the more modern approach to astrological aspects is exemplified by research on astrological harmonic , of which john addey was a major proponent , and which johannes kepler earlier advocated in his book harmonice mundi in 1619 . but even in modern times , aspects are considered either hard ( the 90° square , the 180° opposition ) or easy ( the 120° trine , the 60° sextile ) . the conjunction aspect ( essentially 0° , discounting orb ) can be in either category , depending on which two planets it is that are conjunct . a list of aspects below presents their angular values and a recommended orb for each aspect . the orbs are subject to variation , depending on the need for detail and personal preferences . major aspects . the traditional major aspects are sometimes called ptolemaic aspects since they were defined and used by ptolemy in the 1st century , ad . these aspects are the conjunction ( 0° ) , sextile ( 60° ) , square ( 90° ) , trine ( 120° ) , and opposition ( 180° ) . it is important to note that different astrologers and separate astrological systems/traditional utilize differing orbs ( the degree of separation between exactitude ) when calculating and using the aspects , though almost all use a larger orb for a conjunction when compared to the other aspects . the major aspects are those that can be used to divide 360 evenly and are divisible by 10 ( with the exception of the semi-sextile ) . conjunction . left a conjunction ( abrv . con ) is an angle of approximately 0–⁠10° . an orb of approximately 10° is usually considered a conjunction , but if neither the sun nor moon is involved , some consider the conjunction to have a maximum orb of only about 8° . conjunctions are said to be the most powerful aspect , mutually intensifying the effects of the planets involved ; they are major point in an individual 's chart . whether the conjunction in question is regarded as beneficial or detrimental depends on the specific planets involved . in particular , conjunctions involving the sun , venus , and/or jupiter , in any of the three possible conjunction combinations , are considered highly favourable , while conjunctions involving the moon , mars , and/or saturn , again in any of the three possible conjunction combinations , are considered highly unfavourable . exceptionally , the sun , venus , and jupiter were in a 3-way ( beneficial ) conjunction on november & nbsp ; 9 & ndash ; 10 , 1970 , while on march & nbsp ; 10 of that same year , the moon , mars , and saturn were in 3-way ( detrimental ) conjunction . if either of two planets involved in a conjunction is also under tension from one or more hard aspects with one or more other planets , then the added presence of the conjunction aspect will further intensify the tension of that hard aspect . a planet in very close conjunction to the sun ( within 17 minutes of arc , or only about 0.28° ) is said to be cazimi , an ancient astrological term meaning '' in the heart '' ( of the sun ) . for example , '' venus cazimi '' means venus is in conjunction with the sun with an orb of less than ≈ ⁠0.28° . such a planetary position is a conjunction of great strength . a related term is combust , applicable when the planet in conjunction with the sun is only moderately close to the sun . in the case of combust , specific orb limit will depend on the particular planet in conjunction with the sun . the sun and moon experience a conjunction every single month of the year ⁠— ⁠during the new moon . great conjunctions . great conjunctions ( between the two slowest classical planets ) have attracted considerable attention in the past as celestial omens . during the late middle ages and the renaissance , great conjunctions were a topic broached by most astronomers of the period up to the times of tycho brahe and kepler , by scholastic thinkers as roger bacon the opus majus of roger bacon , ed . j . h . bridges , oxford : clarendon press , 1897 , vol . i , p . 263 . or pierre d'ailly , de concordia astronomice veritatis et narrationis historice ( 1414 ) and they are mentioned in popular and literary writing by authors such as dante woody k . , dante and the doctrine of the great conjunctions , dante studies , with the annual report of the dante society , no . 95 ( 1977 ) , pp . 119–134 and shakespeare . aston m . , the fiery trigon conjunction : an elizabethan astrological prediction , isis , vol . 61 , no . 2 ( summer , 1970 ) , pp . 158–187 this interest is traced back in europe to the translations from arabic sources , most notably albumasar 's book on conjunctions . de magnis coniunctionibus was translated in the 12th century , a modern edition-translation by k . yamamoto and ch . burnett , leiden , 2000 as successive great conjunctions occur nearly 120° apart , their appearances form a triangular pattern . in a series every third conjunction returns after some 60 years to the vicinity of the first . these returns are observed to be shifted by some 8° relative to the fixed stars , so no more than four of them occur in the same zodiacal sign . usually the conjunctions occur in one of the following triplicity or trigons of zodiacal constellations : aries , sagittarius , and leo taurus , capricorn , and virgo gemini , aquarius , and libra cancer , pisces , and scorpius after about 220 years the pattern shifts to the next trigon , and in about 900 years returns to the first trigon . if and designate the periods of jupiter and saturn then the return takes 1/ ( 5/s-2/j ) which comes to 883.15 years , but to be a whole number of conjunction intervals it must be sometimes 913 years and sometimes 854 . see etz . to each triangular pattern astrologers have ascribed one from the series of four elements . particular importance has been accorded to the occurrence of a great conjunction in a new trigon , which is bound to happen after some 240 years at most . etz d . , ( 2000 ) , conjunctions of jupiter and saturn , journal of the royal astronomical society of canada , vol . 94 , p.174 even greater importance was attributed to the beginning of a new cycle after all fours trigons had been visited , something which happens in about 900 years . medieval astrologers usually gave 960 as the length of the full cycle , apparently because in some cases it took 240 years to pass from one trigon to the next . if a cycle is defined by when the conjunctions return to the same right ascension rather than to the same constellation , then because of axial precession the cycle is only about 800 years . use of the alphonsine tables apparently led to the use of precessing signs , and kepler gave a value of 794 years ( 40 conjunctions ) . despite the inaccuracies and some disagreement about the beginning of the cycle the belief in the significance of such events generated a stream of publications which grew steadily up to the end of the 16th century . as the great conjunction of 1583 was the last in the watery trigon it was widely supposed to herald apocalyptic changes ; a papal bull against divinations was issued in 1586 and as nothing really significant had happened by 1603 with the advent of a new trigon , the public interest rapidly died . sextile — intermediate major/minor aspect . left a sextile ( abrv . sxt or sex ) is an angle of 60° ( 1/6 of the 360° ecliptic , or 1/2 of a trine 120° ) . an orb between 3-4 is allowed depending on the planets involved . the sextile has been traditionally said to be similar in influence to the trine , but less intense . it indicates ease of communication between the two elements involved , with compatibility and harmony between them . a sextile provides opportunity and is very responsive to effort expended to gain its benefits . see information on the semisextile below . square . left a square ( abrv . sqr or squ ) is an angle of 90° ( 1/4 of the 360° ecliptic , or 1/2 of an opposition 180° ) . an orb of somewhere between 5° and 10° orbs used by liz greene , see astrodienst is usually allowed depending on the planets involved . as with the trine and the sextile , in the square , it is usually the outer or superior planet that has an effect on the inner or inferior one . the square 's energy is strong and usable but has a tension that needs integration between 2 different areas of life , or offers a choice point where an important decision needs to be made that involves an opportunity cost . it is the smallest major aspect that usually involves houses in different quadrants . trine . left a trine ( abbrev . tri ) is an angle of 120° ( 1/3 of the 360° ecliptic ) , an orb of somewhere between 5° and 10° depending on the planets involved . the trine relates to what is natural and indicates harmony and ease . the trine may involve talent or ability which is innate . the trine has been traditionally assumed to be extremely beneficial . when involved in a transit , the trine involves situations that emerge from a current or past situation in a natural way . opposition . left an opposition ( abrv . opp ) is an angle of 180° ( 1/2 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of somewhere between 5° and 10° is usually allowed depending on the planets . oppositions are said to be the second most powerful aspect . it resembles the conjunction although the difference between them is that the opposition is fundamentally relational . some say it is prone to exaggeration as it is not unifying like the conjunction but has a dichotomous quality and an externalizing effect . all important axes in astrology are essentially oppositions . therefore , at its most basic , it often signifies a relationship that can be oppositional or complementary . minor aspects . quincunx ( inconjunct ) — intermediate major/minor aspect . a quincunx is an angle of 150° ( 5/12 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of ±3.5° is usually allowed depending on the planets involved . unlike all the other aspects , it does not offer equal divisions of the circle . its effect is most obvious when there is a triangulating aspect of a 3rd planet in any major aspect to the 2 planets which are quincunx . its interpretation will rely mostly on the houses , planets , and signs involved . the effect will involve different areas of life being brought together that are not usually in communication since the planets are far enough apart to be in different house quadrants , like the trine , but often with a shift in perspective involving others not previously seen clearly . keywords for the quincunx are mystery , creativity , unpredictability , imbalance , surreal , resourcefulness , and humor . semi-sextile . a semi-sextile is an angle of 30° ( 1/12 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of ±1.2° is allowed . it is the most often used of the minor aspects perhaps for no other reason than it can be easily seen . it indicates a mental interaction between the planets involved that is more sensed than experienced externally . any major aspect transit to a given planetary position will also involve the other planet that is in semi-sextile aspect to it . the energetic quality is one of building and potentiating each other gradually , but planets , houses and signs involved must be considered . similar to a sextile in offering a quality of opportunity with conscious effort to benefit from . quintile . a quintile is an angle of 72° ( 1/5 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of ±1.2° is allowed . it indicates a strong creative flow of energy between the planets involved , often an opportunity for something performative , entertaining or expressive . septile . a septile is an angle of roughly 51.5° ( 1/7 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of ±1° is allowed . it is the only prime number aspect that is an inexact number . it is a mystical aspect that indicates a hidden flow of energy between the planets involved , often involving spiritual or energetic sensitivity and an awareness of inner and more subtle , hidden levels of reality involving the planets in septile aspect . semi-square . a semi-square is an angle of 45° ( 1/8 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of ±2° is allowed . it is an important minor aspect and indicates a stimulating or challenging energy like that of a square but less intense and more internal . the semi-square is considered to be the 8th harmonic of the chart because it is one-eighth of the 360° circle that the zodiac resides in ( i.e . , 360 / 8 45 ) . the semi-square is considered to be a minor hard aspect because it is thought to cause friction in the native 's life and prompt them to take some action to reduce that friction . for example , if the sun is posited in 10° aquarius and venus is posited in 25° pisces then a semi-square would occur . this is thought to indicate that the native is not likely to be totally happy in matters of love . the native is thought to have a tendency to seek out those individuals who are not necessarily compatible to them , and this may lead to a sense of tension and actions to correct what to them may be frustration . novile . a novile is an angle of 40° ( 1/9 of the 360° ecliptic ) . an orb of ±1° is allowed . it indicates an energy of perfection and/or idealization . declinations . the parallel and antiparallel ( or contraparallel ) are two other aspects which refer to degrees of declination above or below the celestial equator . they are not widely used by astrologers . parallel : same degree± 1-degree 12-minutes of arc . this may be similar to a semi-square or quincunx in that it is not clearly seen . it represents an opportunity for perspective and communication between energies that requires some work to be made conscious . contraparallel : opposite degree± 1-degree 12-minute of arc . said to be similar to the parallel . ( some who use the parallel do not consider the contraparallel an aspect . ) . see also . astrological symbols hard aspect ( astrology ) soft aspect ( astrology ) applying aspect ( astrology ) conjunction opposition cosmobiology hamburg school of astrology quadrature ( astronomy ) . references . external links . the classical origin & traditional use of aspects deborah houlding online ephemeris from khaldea.com—600bc to 2400ad—calculated for midnight gmt ; also with an aspectarian included for years 1900 to 2005