Battle of Montereau

background . allied advance . on 10 february , the army of bohemia under karl philipp , prince of schwarzenberg began advancing from troyes . on the right , peter wittgenstein and karl philipp von wrede headed for nogent and bray on the seine river supported by the guards and reserves . on the left , william i of württemberg moved on sens with the i corps of frederick bianchi , duke of casalanza on his left . the left flank forces were backed by ignaz gyulai 's corps . the allies were briefly checked at nogent on the 10th by 1,000 french troops under louis-auguste-victor , count de ghaisnes de bourmont . sens was taken on the 11th after a skirmish between the crown prince and jacques-alexandre-françois allix de vaux . tasked with the defense of the seine , marshal claude perrin victor held nogent and marshal nicolas oudinot defended montereau . on the 12th the allies captured bray from a weak force of french national guards as well as the bridge at pont-sur-seine near montereau . afraid of being surrounded , victor evacuated nogent and fell back . the appearance of troops under marshal jacques macdonald did not stop the retreat and by 15 february the french were moving back to the yerres river only from paris . alexander nikitich seslavin led a scouting force of three russian hussar squadrons and one cossack regiment well to the south to seize montargis and threaten orléans . auxerre was stormed and its garrison wiped out . cossacks roamed freely in the forest and palace of fontainebleau . when victor 's wagon train appeared at charenton-le-pont the parisians were thrown into panic . meanwhile , fleeing peasants reported that paris would soon be attacked by 200,000 cossacks . french counteroffensive . following his successes in the six days ' campaign on 10–14 february 1814 , emperor napoleon headed southward towards the seine to stop schwarzenberg 's threat to paris . forces under marshals édouard mortier and auguste marmont were left behind to keep gebhard leberecht von blücher 's army of silesia under observation . giving up his plans to finish off blücher , napoleon left montmirail on 15 february with the imperial guard and emmanuel grouchy 's cavalry . in an epic march , with some infantry traveling in carts and wagons , napoleon 's leading forces reached guignes at 3:00 & nbsp ; pm on the 16th after moving in 36 hours . another authority stated that some troops marched in 36 hours . hearing of blücher 's defeat and the approach of napoleon , the cautious schwarzenberg scrambled to put the seine between his army and the french emperor . on 17 february , he ordered wittgenstein to retreat to provins while michael andreas barclay de tolly massed the russian and prussian guards near nogent . he instructed wrede to fall back to donnemarie while leaving an advanced guard at nangis . württemberg and bianchi were posted near montereau while gyulai held pont-sur-yonne and the austrian reserve was at sens . if the army of bohemia needed to retreat farther , it was important to hold the position at montereau . matvei platov was to the west at nemours where his 2,100 cossacks captured 600 men of an imperial guard depot battalion on the 16th . early on 17 february , napoleon 's leading elements under etienne maurice gérard enveloped a russian force led by pyotr petrovich palen . in the battle of mormant , pahlen 's 2,500 infantry and 1,250 cavalry were overwhelmed by the french , suffering 3,114 killed , wounded or captured . a nearby austrian force led by anton von hardegg remained largely inert while its allies were being cut to pieces . finally , hardegg allowed 550 troopers from the schwarzenberg uhlan regiment nr . 2 to assist the russians . the reval and selenginsk infantry regiments suffered such heavy losses that they were withdrawn from the campaign . next , the french struck wrede 's advance guard at nangis and threw it back to villeneuve-le-comte . at nangis napoleon split his army into three columns . the right column including victor 's ii corps , gerard 's reserve of paris and cavalry under samuel-françois lhéritier and étienne tardif de pommeroux de bordesoulle took the road south toward montereau . the center column consisted of macdonald 's xi corps , two cavalry divisions and the imperial guard . this force headed for bray . the left column , made up of oudinot 's vii corps and françois étienne de kellermann 's cavalry , pursued wittgenstein east toward provins . pierre claude pajol 's cavalry and michel-marie pacthod 's national guards set out from melun and advanced southeast toward montereau . the divisions of allix and henri françois marie charpentier moved south from melun to fontainebleau . macdonald and oudinot pressed hardegg 's rear guard back , capturing some wagons . victor came across one of wrede 's divisions drawn up on the heights of valjouan near villeneuve . victor sent gérard to attack the bavarians in front while bordesoulle circled to take them from behind . soon the bavarians were retreating in disorder and lhéritier missed a chance to deliver the coup de grace with his cavalry . nevertheless , wrede 's corps sustained 2,500 casualties during the day . victor 's soldiers were exhausted , so he called a halt . napoleon was furious that victor disobeyed his orders to press on to montereau during the night and asked his chief of staff louis-alexandre berthier to write him a harsh reprimand . battle . forces . the crown prince 's iv corps consisted of an infantry division led by christian johann gottgetreu von koch and a cavalry division under prince adam von württemberg . ludwig stockmeyer 's brigade consisted of two battalions of king frederick jäger regiment nr . 9 and one battalion of light infantry regiment nr . 10 . christoph friedrich david döring 's brigade was made up of two battalions each of infantry regiments duke wilhelm nr . 2 , nr . 3 and nr . 7 . prince karl von hohenlohe-kirchberg 's brigade included two battalions each of infantry regiments nr . 4 and crown prince nr . 6 . walsleben 's cavalry brigade comprised four squadrons each of duke louis jäger zu pferde regiment nr . 2 and crown prince dragoon regiment nr . 3 . karl august maximillian jett 's cavalry brigade had four squadrons of prince adam jäger zu pferde regiment nr . 4 . attached to each cavalry brigade was one horse artillery battery while döring 's and hohenlohe 's brigades each had a foot artillery battery . all four batteries were armed with four 6-pound cannons and two howitzers . attached to the iv corps was joseph schäffer 's austrian brigade . this unit consisted of two battalions each of infantry regiments gyulai nr . 21 , esterhazy nr . 32 and josef colloredo nr . 57 , three battalions of infantry regiment zach nr . 15 , six squadrons of archduke ferdinand hussar regiment nr . 3 and two-foot artillery batteries . altogether there were 11,000 württembergers and 4,000 austrians present . a second source credited the allies with 18,000 troops in montereau . victor 's ii corps had the divisions of louis huguet-chateau and guillaume philibert duhesme . chateau 's 1st division was made up of 1st battalions of the 11th and 24th light and the 2nd , 19th , 37th and 56th line infantry regiments . duhesme 's 2nd division included 1st and 2nd battalions of the 4th , 18th and 46th line and 1st battalions of the 72nd and 93rd line and 26th light . chateau 's division numbered only 1,536 officers and men , since all units except the 477-strong 19th were sadly understrength , while duhesme had 2,442 effectives . the 1st division was supported by five 6-pound cannons and one howitzer while the 2nd division counted eight 6-pound cannons and four howitzers . with 475 gunners and 135 sappers , victor 's total strength was 4,588 soldiers . gérard 's reserve of paris included the divisions of georges joseph dufour and jacques félix jan de la hamelinaye . the 1st division was made up of one battalion each of the 5th , 12th , 15th and 29th light and the 32nd , 58th and 135th line . the 2nd division comprised the 26th , 82nd , 86th , 121st , 122nd and 142nd line . gérard 's force had 214 artillerists from three companies attached . pajol led a provisional cavalry corps consisting of three small brigades , 460 chasseurs à cheval under jacques-antoine-adrien delort , 476 dragoons under françois grouvel and 400 hussars under charles yves césar du coetlosquet . pacthod commanded 3,000 national guards and there were 800 gendarmes ( military police ) with this column . macdonald 's xi corps counted three divisions led by joseph jean baptiste albert , françois pierre joseph amey and michel sylvestre brayer . lhéritier commanded the v cavalry corps which was formed from three mounted divisions . hippolyte piré 's 3rd light cavalry division included the 14th , 26th and 27th chasseurs à cheval and the 3rd hussars , andré louis briche 's 3rd heavy cavalry division the 2nd , 6th , 11th , 13th and 15th dragoons and lhéritier 's 4th cavalry division the 18th , 19th , 20th , 22nd and 25th dragoons . bordesoulle 's detachment numbered 500 horsemen from depot squadrons . the imperial guard consisted of the old guard division of louis friant , the 1st young guard division of claude marie meunier , the 2nd young guard division of philibert jean-baptiste curial , and the 2nd and 3rd guard cavalry divisions . marshal michel ney led the two young guard divisions while étienne marie antoine champion de nansouty led the guard cavalry divisions . the 2nd guard cavalry was made up of the 1st polish guard lancer , empress dragoon and polish and 3rd éclaireur regiments . the 3rd guard cavalry division had the guard horse grenadier and guard chasseurs à cheval regiments . according to one authority , units that fought in the battle included most of the regiments from the corps of victor and gérard , the guard artillery , guard chasseurs à cheval and 2nd guard lancers , 3rd hussars from jacques gervais , baron subervie 's brigade , 18th dragoons of auguste lamotte 's brigade , 25th dragoons from jean antoine de collaert 's brigade , 9th lancers and 22nd chasseurs à cheval from kellermann 's vi cavalry corps and the 7th lancers , 9th chasseurs à cheval and 7th hussars from unidentified corps . macdonald 's corps and the guard infantry were not engaged . action . after issuing conflicting orders concerning the defense of montereau , schwarzenberg finally directed the crown prince to hold the town until the evening of 18 february . meanwhile , oudinot 's leading troops found that wittgenstein had withdrawn across the seine at nogent while wrede was across at bray . at both places , the allies broke the bridges . while montereau on the south bank is in flat terrain , the north bank is crowned by a height with a steep slope next to the river and a gentler slope on the north side . atop the ridge , surville chateau overlooks the bridges and town of montereau , which was surrounded by vineyards and meadows to the south and east . the paris road approached montereau from the northwest where there was a forest . the road from salins came from the northeast and ran alongside the river from courbeton chateau to the bridge . the hamlet of les ormeaux was a short distance east of the paris road . the roads from the north join at the bridge which crosses the seine to the eastern suburb , then immediately crosses the yonne into montereau . the seine bridge was the site of the assassination of john the fearless , duke of burgundy in 1419 . the crown prince deployed 8,500-foot soldiers , 1,000 horsemen and 26 field guns on the north bank of the seine . a second authority counted 12,000 defenders . the left flank was anchored in les ormeaux , the center incorporated the surville chateau and park while the right flank included the courbeton chateau and blocked the road from salins . two austrian batteries from bianchi 's corps were positioned on the south bank , one covering each flank . there was also a iv corps brigade on the south bank near the eastern suburb at the motteux farm . schäffer 's austrians held the surville park in the center . the allies were supported by a total of 40 field pieces . napoleon ordered victor to be at montereau at 6:00 & nbsp ; am but the first french forces to arrive were pajol 's cavalry and pacthod 's national guards at 8:00 & nbsp ; am . aside from numbering no more than 4,500 men , the horsemen had almost no training while the national guards were ill-equipped and ill-trained . they made no impression on the crown prince 's defenders . victor leading elements arrived at 9:00 & nbsp ; am and their initial attack was repulsed . when the divisions of chateau and duhesme reached the field they were thrown into an attack on les ormeaux . this was beaten back and chateau , who was victor 's son-in-law , was fatally wounded . the württemberg cavalry charged and drove the french horsemen back into the forest . unable to make any progress by 11:00 & nbsp ; am , victor awaited the coming of gérard 's corps . angry at the marshal 's slowness , napoleon replaced victor and placed command of the ii corps in gérard 's hands . gérard led his troops up the heights but the allied artillery was well-served and threw back assault after assault . in the afternoon , the imperial guard artillery arrived and 40 more guns were brought into action . at 3:00 & nbsp ; pm , napoleon hurled three attack columns at les ormeaux and surville and another one against the allied right flank along the seine . while the guard remained in reserve , the french artillery unleashed a barrage at surville chateau . the french finally overran les ormeaux , causing the crown prince to order schäffer 's austrians to cover the retreat . as the württembergers began pulling back , pajol launched a cavalry charge down the paris highway against the allied left flank . at this time , french infantry rushed the surville chateau and made its garrison prisoners . there were now 30,000 french troops on the field supported by 70 or 80 field pieces . at first the withdrawal was conducted in good order , but the allied soldiers became more disorganized as they tried to negotiate the steep slope . they fell into complete confusion upon encountering a sunken road . soon , every allied soldier was running for the seine bridge . the crown prince tried to rally his men and was nearly captured by the french cavalry . the french emperor ordered 60 guns onto the surville heights where they unlimbered and fired their missiles into the fleeing mob of allies crowding the bridges . when napoleon personally sighted one of the cannons , his guardsmen begged him to leave . he refused saying , '' courage my friends , the bullet which is to kill me is not yet cast '' . pajol 's horsemen charged into the fleeing mass of soldiers and managed to seize first the seine bridge and then the yonne bridge before either could be blown up , though they were rigged for demolition . duhesme 's division rapidly crossed after the cavalry and helped clear montereau of the allies . the beaten allies joined hohenlohe 's brigade and began a disorderly retreat toward le tombe , a village on the road to bray . the movement was covered by jett 's cavalry brigade . napoleon sent marshal françois joseph lefebvre and his own cavalry escort in pursuit toward bray . an eyewitness wrote that lefebvre foamed at the mouth and struck at allied soldiers with his saber . results . according to digby smith , the allies had losses of 1,400 killed and wounded , of which the württembergers lost 92 killed and 714 wounded ; prince hohenlohe was killed . the french captured 3,600 men , two cannons and two ammunition wagons . of these totals , the austrians had about 2,000 casualties and schäffer became a french prisoner . the french lost 2,000 killed and wounded . a source quoted by smith gave 4,895 allied casualties and 15 guns lost . francis loraine petre asserted that the allies lost nearly 5,000 men and 15 field pieces . david g . chandler stated that the allies suffered 6,000 casualties and lost 15 cannons ; the french lost 2,500 casualties . another authority wrote that both the french and allies lost 3,000 killed and wounded , while the french took 2,000 men , six guns and four colors . chateau died from his wounds on 8 may 1814 . the victory failed to live up to napoleon 's expectations . he lamented , '' the foe has enjoyed a stroke of rare good fortune , the heavy frosts permitted him to move over the fields – otherwise at least half his guns and transport would have been taken . '' in his disappointment he turned on his generals . after the battle when victor complained to the emperor about losing his command , napoleon unleashed a storm of abuse on his hapless subordinate . he also raged against victor 's wife who he accused of snubbing empress marie louise . victor managed to blunt his sovereign 's fury by recalling their military exploits in italy and by reminding napoleon that his son-in-law chateau lay dying . finally , napoleon relented and gave him the two young guard divisions of charpentier and joseph boyer de rebeval . other generals who felt napoleon 's wrath at this time were lhéritier for failing to charge at valjouan , jean françois aimé dejean for not providing enough artillery ammunition and claude-étienne guyot for losing some cannons . even before the battle started , schwarzenberg ordered a general withdrawal to troyes . he ordered wrede to hold bray until nightfall on 19 february and sent a dispatch to blücher asking him to support his right flank at méry-sur-seine on 21 february . the prussian replied that he would be at the rendezvous with 53,000 troops and 300 guns . with montereau in french hands , the position of the austrians on the left flank along the loing river became precarious . under the guise of negotiations with allix , they retreated to join the wreckage of schäffer 's brigade at saint-sérotin . seslavin was ordered to relinquish his far left flank position and take a position on the opposite flank . napoleon 's pursuit was hampered by a lack of bridges and the allies got a two-day head start in the march to troyes . the next action between the two armies was at méry-sur-seine on 22 february . battlefield today . currently , part of this historic battle site near the village of montereau-fault-yonne is being developed as a theme park celebrating the life of french emperor napoleon bonaparte . the park , napoleonland , is set for completion in 2017 . footnotes .