Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza

works . schooling and positions . cavalli-sforza entered ghislieri college in pavia in 1939 and he received his m.d . from the university of pavia in 1944 . in 1949 , he was appointed to a research post at the department of genetics , cambridge university by the statistician and evolutionary biologist ronald a . fisher in the field of e . coli genetics . in 1950 , he left the university of cambridge to teach in northern italy ( parma , and pavia ) before taking up a professorship at stanford in 1970 . he remained at stanford until he retired in 1992 . in 1999 he won the balzan prize for the science of human origins . he has been a member of the pontifical academy of sciences since 1994 . he was awarded the telesio-galilei academy award in 2011 for biology . specific contributions . cavalli-sforza initiated a new field of research by combining the concrete findings of demography with a newly available analysis of blood type in an actual human population . he also studied the connections between migration patterns and blood groups . writing in the mid-1960s with another genetics student of ronald a . fisher , a.w.f . edwards , cavalli-sforza pioneered statistical methods for estimating evolutionary trees ( phylogeny ) . edwards and cavalli-sforza wrote about trees of populations within the human species , where genetic differences are affected both by treelike patterns of historical separation of populations and by spread of genes among populations by migration and admixture . many of these influential and fundamental early papers were reprinted in 2018 in a volume focusing on a . w . f . edwards , and dedicated to cavalli-sforza and ian hacking . in later papers , cavalli-sforza has written about the effects of both divergence and migration on human gene frequencies . while cavalli-sforza is best known for his work in genetics , he also , in collaboration with marcus feldman and others , initiated the sub-discipline of cultural anthropology known alternatively as coevolution , gene-culture coevolution , cultural transmission theory or dual inheritance theory . the publication cultural transmission and evolution : a quantitative approach ( 1981 ) made use of models from population genetics and infectious disease epidemiology to investigate the transmission of culturally transmitted units . this line of inquiry initiated research into the correlation of patterns of genetic and cultural dispersion . cavalli-sforza conducted several studies of how language differences may serve as barriers to gene flow between adjacent human populations . his studies of human migration have tested hypotheses of linguists merritt ruhlen and joseph greenberg about language '' superfamilies '' . the hypothesized superfamilies are controversial among other linguists . . books . cavalli-sforza has summed up his work for laymen in five topics covered in genes , peoples , and languages . luigi cavalli-sforza , genes , peoples , and languages , tr . mark seielstad , north point press ( 2000 ) according to an article published in the economist , the work of cavalli-sforza '' challenges the assumption that there are significant genetic differences between human races , and indeed , the idea that 'race ' has any useful biological meaning at all '' . the book illustrates both the problems of constructing a general '' hereditary tree '' for the entire human race , and some mechanisms and data analysis methods to greatly reduce these problems , thus constructing a fascinating hypothesis of the recent 150,000 years of human expansion , migration , and human diversity formation . geoffrey carr , '' survey : the proper study of mankind '' , the economist vol . 356 , no . 8177 , pg . 11 ( july 1 , 2000 ) . in the book cavalli-sforza asserts that europeans are , in their ancestry , about two-thirds asian and one-third african . cavalli-sforza 's the history and geography of human genes cavalli-sforza , l . l . , p . menozzi , a . piazza . 1994 . the history and geography of human genes . princeton university press , princeton . ( 1994 with paolo menozzi and alberto piazza ) is a standard reference on human genetic variation . cavalli-sforza also wrote the great human diasporas : the history of diversity and evolution ( together with his son francesco ) . earlier , in the 1970s , he and walter bodmer wrote what was the standard textbook on modern human genetics , and was also a basic reference for population genetics more generally , as the field was at the time , the genetics of human populations . whfreeman , 1971 . the two , with bodmer as first author , later wrote another more basic text , genetics , evolution , and man whfreeman , 1976 . along with his 1994 book these are essentially classical presentations of human genetics before the genomics era began providing very much more detailed data . death . professor cavalli-sforza died on 31 august 2018 , at the age of 96 at his home in belluno , italy . . references . bibliography . a.w.f . edwards , and l.l . cavalli-sforza . 1964 . reconstruction of evolutionary trees . pp . & nbsp ; 67–76 in phenetic and phylogenetic classification , ed . v . h . heywood and j . mcneill . systematics association pub . no . 6 , london . cavalli-sforza , l.l . and a.w.f . edwards . 1965 . analysis of human evolution . pp . & nbsp ; 923–933 in genetics today . proceedings of the xi international congress of genetics , the hague , the netherlands , september 1963 , volume 3 , ed . s . j . geerts , pergamon press , oxford . cavalli-sforza , l.l . and a.w.f . edwards . 1967 . phylogenetic analysis : models and estimation procedures . american journal of human genetics 19:233–257 . cavalli-sforza , l . l . and w . f . bodmer . 1971 . the genetics of human populations . w . h . freeman , san francisco ( reprinted 1999 by dover publications ) . cavalli-sforza , l . l . and m . feldman . 1981 . cultural transmission and evolution . princeton university press , princeton . cavalli-sforza , l . l . , p . menozzi , a . piazza . 1994 . the history and geography of human genes . princeton university press , princeton . cavalli-sforza , l . l . and francesco cavalli-sforza . 1995 . the great human diasporas : the history of diversity and evolution . addison-wesley cavalli-sforza , l.l . 2000 . genes , peoples , and languages . north point press , new york . cavalli sforza , l . l , il caso e la necessità – ragioni e limiti della diversità genetica , 2007 , di renzo editore , roma . films . 2003 – journey of man . further reading . . external links . : brief biography of cavalli-sforza the great human diasporas – the history of diversity and evolution : book review : book review luigi luca cavalli-sforza interview by frederica crivellaro , december 5th 2006 ( video ) ( annual reviews interview video )