Strowger switch

history . strowger , an undertaker , was motivated to invent an automatic telephone exchange after having difficulties with the local telephone operators , one of whom was the wife of a competitor . he was said to be convinced that she , as one of the manual telephone exchange operators , was sending calls '' to the undertaker '' to her husband . he conceived his invention in 1888 , and was awarded a patent for an automatic telephone exchange in 1891 . the initial model was made from a round collar box and some straight pins . while almon strowger devised the initial concept , he was not alone in his endeavors and sought the assistance of his brother arnold , nephew william , and others with a knowledge of electricity and financing to realize the concept . the strowger automatic telephone exchange company was founded in 1891 . the company installed and opened the first commercial exchange in his then-home town of la porte , indiana on november 3 , 1892 , with about 75 subscribers and a capacity for 99 . it used two telegraph type keys on the telephone , which had to be tapped the correct number of times to step the switch , but the use of separate keys with separate conductors to the exchange was not practical for a commercial system . early advertising called the new invention the '' girl-less , cuss-less , out-of-order-less , wait-less telephone '' . rochester 's remarkable past by donovan a . shilling , pancoast publishing , 2011 the strowger automatic telephone exchange company became the automatic electric , which strowger was involved in founding , although strowger himself seems not to have been involved in further developments . the strowger patents were exclusively licensed to the automatic electric company . strowger sold his patents in 1896 for us 1,800 and sold his share in automatic electric in 1898 for us 10,000 . his patents subsequently sold for us 2.5 million in 1916 . company engineers continued development of the strowger designs and submitted several patents in the names of its employees . the strowger system was widely used until the development of the more reliable crossbar switch , an electromechanical switch with a matrix of vertical and horizontal bars and simpler motions . thumb . patent details . strowger 's patent specifies dialing equipment at the customer location and the switching equipment at the central office . the telegraph keys or telephone dial creates trains of on-off current pulses corresponding to the digits 1-9 , and 0 ( which sends 10 pulses ) . this equipment originally consisted of two telegraph keys engaged by knife switches , and evolved into the rotary dial telephone . the central office switching equipment has a two-motion stepping switch . a contact arm is moved up to select one of ten rows of contacts , and then rotated clockwise to select one of ten contacts in that row , a total of 100 choices . the stepping motion is controlled by the current pulses coming from the originating customer 's telegraph keys , and later from the rotary dial . two-motion mechanism . the strowger switch has three banks of contacts . toward the upper end of each shaft are two ratchets . the upper one has ten grooves , and raises the shaft . the lower one has long vertical teeth ( on the other side , hidden ) . the strowger switch uses two telegraph-type keys on a telephone set for dialing . each key requires a separate wire to the exchange . the keys are tapped to step the switch in two stages . the first set of incoming pulses raises the armature of an electromagnet to move a shaft which selects the desired level of contacts , by engaging a pawl with the upper ratchet . another pawl , pivoting on the frame , holds the shaft at that height as it rotates . the second set of pulses , from the second key , operates another electromagnet . its pawl engages the ( hidden ) vertical teeth in the lower ratchet to rotate the shaft to the required position . it is kept there against spring tension by a pawl pivoted on the frame . when the switch returns to its home position , typically when a call is complete , a release magnet disengages the pawls that hold the shaft in position . an interlock ensures that the spring on the shaft rotates it to angular home position before it drops to its home position by gravity . development of the strowger system . the commercial version of the strowger switch , as developed by the strowger automatic telephone exchange company , used a rotary dial for signalling to the exchange . the original final selector ( connector ) switch which connected to 100 customers was supplemented by preceding group selector stages , as the '' cascading '' enabled connection to many more customers , and to customers at other exchanges . another requirement for commercial systems was a circuit to detect a busy connection ( line ) and return a busy signal to the calling subscriber . instead of dedicating an expensive first-stage selector switch to each customer as in the first exchange , the customer was given access to the first-stage switch of a telephone network , often by a line-finder which searches '' backward '' for the calling line ; so requiring only a few relays ( in most cases two , a line , and a cut-off relay ) , for the equipment required for each customer line . later strowger ( sxs ) exchanges often use a subscriber uniselector as part of the line equipment individual to each line , which searches '' forward '' for a first selector . this is more economical for higher calling-rate domestic or business customers , and has the advantage that access to additional switches can readily be added if the traffic increases ( the number of linefinders serving a group is limited by the wiring multiple installed ) . hence exchanges with subscriber uniselectors were usually used at british exchanges with a high proportion of business customers , e.g . director exchanges , or in new zealand where the provision of local free calling meant that residential customers had a relatively high calling rate . the fundamental modularity of the system combined with its step-by-step ( hence the alternative name ) selection process and an almost unlimited potential for expansion gives the strowger system its technical advantage . previous systems had all been designed for a fixed number of subscribers to be switched directly to each other in a mesh arrangement . this became quadratically more complex as each new customer was added , as each new customer needed a switch to connect to every other customer . in modern terminology , the previous systems were not '' scalable '' . british deployment . from 1912 , the british general post office , which also operated the british telephone system , installed several automatic telephone exchanges from several vendors in trials at darlington on 10 october 1914 ( rotary system ) , fleetwood ( relay exchange from sweden ) , grimsby ( siemens ) , hereford ( lorimer ) and leeds ( strowger ) . events in telecommunications history - 1927 bt archives the gpo selected the strowger switches for small and medium cities and towns . the selection of switching systems for london and other large cities was not decided until the 1920s , when the director telephone system was adopted . the director systems used sxs switches for destination routing and number translation facilities similar to the register used in common-control exchanges . using similar equipment as in the rest of the network was deemed beneficial and the equipment could be manufactured in britain .