Cyclic nucleotide

history . the understanding of the concept of second messengers , and in particular the role of cyclic nucleotides and their ability to relay physiological signals to a cell , has its origins in the research of glycogen metabolism by carl and gerty cori , for which they were awarded a nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1947 . a number of incremental but important discoveries through the 1950s added to their research , primarily focusing on the activity of glycogen phosphorylase in dog liver . glycogen phosphorylase catalyzes the first step in glycogenolysis , the process of breaking glycogen into its substituent glucose parts . earl sutherland investigated the effect of the hormones adrenaline and glucagon on glycogen phosphorylase , earning him the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1971 . in 1956 edwin krebs and edmond fischer discovered that adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) is required for the conversion of phosphorylase b to glycogen phosphorylase a . while investigating the action of adrenaline on glycogenolysis the next year , sutherland and walter wosilait reported that inorganic phosphate is released when the enzyme liver phosphorylase is inactivated ; but when it is activated , it incorporates a phosphate . the “ active factor ” that the hormones produced was finally purified in 1958 , and then identified as containing a ribose , a phosphate , and an adenine in equal ratios . further , it was proved that this factor reverted to 5 ’ -amp when it was inactivated . evgeny fesenko , stanislav kolesnikov , and arkady lyubarsky discovered in 1985 that cyclic guanosine monophosphate ( cgmp ) can initiate the photoresponse in rods . soon after , the role of cnmp in gated ion channels of chemosensitive cilia of olfactory sensory neurons was reported by tadashi nakamura and geoffrey gold . in 1992 lawrence haynes and king-wai yau uncovered cnmp ’ s role in the light-dependent cyclic-nucleotide-gated channel of cone cell . by the end of the decade , the presence of two types of intramembrane receptors was understood : rs ( which stimulates cyclase ) and ri ( which inhibits cyclase ) . wei-jen tang and james hurley reported in 1998 that adenylyl cyclase , which synthesizes camp , is regulated not only by hormones and neurotransmitters , but also by phosphorylation , calcium , forskolin , and guanine nucleotide-binding proteins ( g proteins ) . . chemistry of cnmps . structure . image : cgmp.png thumb cyclic guanosine monophosphate . the cyclic portion refers to the two single bonds between the phosphate group and the ribose the two most well-studied cyclic nucleotides are cyclic amp ( camp ) and cyclic gmp ( cgmp ) , while cyclic cmp ( ccmp ) and cyclic ump ( cump ) are less understood . camp is 3 ’ 5 ’ -cyclic adenosine monophosphate , cgmp is 3 ’ 5 ’ -cyclic guanosine monophosphate , ccmp is cytidine 3',5'-monophosphate , and cump is uridine 2',3'-cyclic phosphate . each cyclic nucleotide has three components . it contains a nitrogenous base ( meaning it contains nitrogen ) : for example , adenine in camp and guanine in cgmp . it also contains a sugar , specifically the five-carbon ribose . and finally , a cyclic nucleotide contains a phosphate . a double-ring purine is the nitrogenous base for camp and cgmp , while cytosine , thymine , and uracil each have a single-ring nitrogenous base ( pyrimidine ) . these three components are connected so that the nitrogenous base is attached to the first carbon of ribose ( 1 ’ carbon ) , and the phosphate group is attached to the 5 ’ carbon of ribose . while all nucleotides have this structure , the phosphate group makes a second connection to the ribose ring at the 3 ’ carbon in cyclic nucleotides . because the phosphate group has two separate bonds to the ribose sugar , it forms a cyclic ring . the atom numbering convention is used to identify the carbons and nitrogens within a cyclic nucleotide . in the pentose , the carbon closest to the carbonyl group is labeled c-1 . when a pentose is connected to a nitrogenous base , carbon atom numbering is distinguished with a prime ( ' ) notation , which differentiates these carbons from the atom numbering of the nitrogenous base . therefore , for camp , 3 ’ 5 ’ -cyclic adenosine monophosphate indicates that a single phosphate group forms a cyclic structure with the ribose group at its 3 ’ and 5 ’ carbons , while the ribose group is also attached to adenosine ( this bond is understood to be at the 1 ’ position of the ribose ) . biochemistry . cyclic nucleotides are found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells . control of intracellular concentrations is maintained through a series of enzymatic reactions involving several families of proteins . in higher order mammals , cnmps are present in many types of tissue . synthesis and degradation . cyclic nucleotides are produced from the generic reaction ntp → cnmp + pp i , where n represents a nitrogenous base . the reaction is catalyzed by specific nucleotidyl cyclases , such that production of camp is catalyzed by adenylyl cyclase and production of cgmp is catalyzed by guanylyl cyclase . adenylyl cyclase has been found in both a transmembrane and cytosolic form , representing distinct protein classes and different sources of camp . both camp and cgmp are degraded by hydrolysis of the 3 ' phosphodiester bond , resulting in a 5'nmp . degradation is carried out primarily by a class of enzymes known as phosphodiesterases ( pdes ) . in mammalian cells , there are 11 known pde families with varying isoforms of each protein expressed based on the cell 's regulatory needs . some phosphodiesterases are cnmp-specific , while others can hydrolyze non-specifically . however , the camp and cgmp degradation pathways are much more understood than those for either ccmp or cump . the identification of specific pdes for ccmp and cump has not been as thoroughly established . . target binding . cyclic nucleotides can be found in many different types of eukaryotic cells , including photo-receptor rods and cones , smooth muscle cells and liver cells . cellular concentrations of cyclic nucleotides can be very low , in the 10 −7 m range , because metabolism and function are often localized in particular parts of the cell . a highly conserved cyclic nucleotide-binding domain ( cnb ) is present in all proteins that bind cnmps , regardless of their biological function . the domain consists of a beta sandwich architecture , with the cyclic nucleotide binding pocket between the beta sheets . the binding of cnmp causes a conformational change that affects the protein 's activity . there is also data to support a synergistic binding effect amongst multiple cyclic nucleotides , with ccmp lowering the effective concentration ( ec 50 ) of camp for activation of protein kinase a ( pka ) . . biology . cyclic nucleotides are integral to a communication system that acts within cells . they act as '' second messengers '' by relaying the signals of many first messengers , such as hormones and neurotransmitters , to their physiological destinations . cyclic nucleotides participate in many physiological responses , including receptor-effector coupling , down-regulation of drug responsiveness , protein-kinase cascades , and transmembrane signal transduction . cyclic nucleotides act as second messengers when first messengers , which can not enter the cell , instead bind to receptors in the cellular membrane . the receptor changes conformation and transmits a signal that activates an enzyme in the cell membrane interior called adenylyl cyclase . this releases camp into the cell interior , where it stimulates a protein kinase called cyclic amp-dependent protein kinase . by phosphorylating proteins , cyclic amp-dependent protein kinase alters protein activity . camp 's role in this process terminates upon hydrolysis to amp by phosphodiesterase . cyclic nucleotides are well-suited to act as second messengers for several reasons . their synthesis is energetically favorable , and they are derived from common metabolic components ( atp and gtp ) . when they break down into amp/gmp and inorganic phosphate , these components are non-toxic . finally , cyclic nucleotides can be distinguished from non-cyclic nucleotides because they are smaller and less polar . . biological significance . the involvement of cyclic nucleotides on biological functions is varied , while an understanding of their role continues to grow . there are several examples of their biological influence . they are associated with long-term and short-term memory . they also work in the liver to coordinate various enzymes that control blood sugar and other nutrients . in bacteria , cyclic nucleotides bind to catabolite gene activator protein ( cap ) , which acts to increase metabolic enzymatic activity by increasing the rate of dna transcription . they also facilitate relaxation of smooth muscle cells in vascular tissue , and activate cyclic cng channels in retinal photoreceptors and olfactory sensory neurons . in addition , they potentially activate cyclic cng channels in : pineal gland light sensitivity , sensory neurons of the vomeronasal organ ( which is involved in the detection of pheromones ) , taste receptor cells , cell signaling in sperm , airway epithelium cells , gonadotropin-releasing hormone ( gnrh ) -secreting neuronal cell line , and renal collecting duct system . . pathway mutations and related diseases . examples of disruptions of cnmp pathways include : mutations in cng channel genes are associated with degeneration of the retina and with color blindness ; and overexpression of cytosolic or soluble adenylyl cyclase ( sac ) has been linked to human prostate cancer . inhibition of sac , or knockdown by rna interference ( rnai ) transfection has been shown to prevent the cell growth of the prostate carcinoma cells . the regulatory pathway appears to be part of the epac pathway and not the pka pathway . phosphodiesterases , principle regulators of cnmp degradation , are often targets for therapeutics . caffeine is a known pde inhibitor , while drugs used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction like sildenafil and tadalafil also act through inhibiting the activity of phosphodiesterases . . references . external links .