Christopher Durang

life . durang was born in montclair , new jersey , the son of patricia elizabeth , a secretary , and architect francis ferdinand durang , jr . he grew up in berkeley heights , new jersey . he attended catholic schools as a child , including the our lady of peace school in new providence and delbarton school in morristown . he received a b.a . in english from harvard and an m.f.a . in playwriting from yale school of drama . he lives in bucks county , pennsylvania , with his husband , actor and playwright john augustine . they have been together since 1986 and were legally married in 2014 . work . his work often deals critically with issues of child abuse , roman catholic dogma , culture , and homosexuality . ben brantley summarized key themes from durang 's plays in a review written in 1994 : 1 ) narcissism ; 2 ) fear or engagement with a danger-filled world ; 3 ) the strangulating nature of family ties ; 4 ) sexual disorientation and the tenuousness of individual identity ; to this list the abusive power of authority figures could be added . while durang 's use of parody and his criticism of many social institutions might appear overly cynical at times , he states : . when i say everyone is crazy that means it 's a very bad day where the amount of crazy people in the world has spread out to the entire universe and it does n't seem possible to cope with anything . i think we 're all neurotic . and i do think relationships are certainly difficult . nonetheless , those lines in the play do get a laugh , so there 's something . it ’ s not as despairing as it sounds , but i do n't not believe it . much of durang 's style can be attributed to the aesthetic of black comedy , a humor style that offers a fatalistic view of life . durang discusses the particular frame of mind that requires the viewer to distance himself from the horrific episode of human suffering and pain ; he explains : i exaggerate awful things further , and then i present it in a way that is funny , and for those of us who find it funny , it has to do with a very clear suspension of disbelief . it is a play , after all , with acted characters ; it allows us a distance we couldn ’ t have in reality . to me this distance allows me to find some rather serious topics funny . durang suggests that his form of humor requires a double-consciousness , an ability to register scenes of cruelty or pain , while simultaneously comprehending the humor . he credits arthur kopit 's “ tragicfarce ” oh dad , poor dad , mom ’ s hung you in the closet and i ’ m feelin ’ so sad as an early influence on his creative vision , a black comedy in which a woman totes her dead husband 's corpse on vacation with her . humor is one way of resolving conflict and anxiety , and black comedy goes a step further to relieve tension regarding subjects that are typically difficult to think about , such as death , family dysfunction , or torture . his plays have been performed nationwide , including on broadway and off-broadway . his works include those in the bibliography as well as a collection of one-act parodies meant to be performed in one evening entitled durang/durang that includes '' mrs . sorken '' , '' for whom the southern belle tolls '' ( a parody of the glass menagerie by tennessee williams ) , '' a stye of the eye '' , '' nina in the morning '' , '' wanda 's visit '' , and '' business lunch at the russian tea room '' . together with marsha norman , durang directed the lila acheson wallace american playwrights program at the julliard school from 1984 to 2016 , teaching playwrights joshua harmon and noah haidle , as well as pulitzer-prize winning david lindsay-abaire , who succeeded durang as co-director . durang has performed as an actor for both stage and screen . he first came to prominence in his off-broadway satirical review das lusitania songspiel , which he performed with friend and fellow yale alum sigourney weaver . later he co-starred in one of his own plays as matt in the marriage of bette and boo , as well as man in the original production of laughing wild . he is currently working on a new play , turning off the morning news , being produced at the mccarter theater in princeton , nj . in film . durang has denounced the robert altman 1987 film adaptation of beyond therapy , calling it '' horrific . '' he accused altman of totally rewriting the script '' so that all psychology is thrown out the window , and the characters dash around acting crazy but with literally no behavioral logic underneath . '' durang has appeared as an actor in the 1987 comedy the secret of my success , 1988 's mr . north , 1989 's penn & teller get killed , 1992 's housesitter and 1994 's the cowboy way . he has also written a number of unproduced screenplays , including the nun who shot liberty valance , the house of husbands ( which he co-authored with wendy wasserstein ) , and the adventures of lola . on television . wanda 's visit , one of the six one-acts in durang/durang was originally written for the pbs series trying times . durang played the part of the waiter in that production . durang appeared as himself on the october 11 , 1986 episode of saturday night live , hosted by his longtime friend sigourney weaver . in the episode , durang and weaver parodied the works of bertolt brecht . the sketch '' funeral parlor '' ( 1987 ) , written for a televised carol burnett special , features a grieving widow ( burnett ) who is disturbed at her husband 's wake by an eccentric mourner , played by robin williams . bibliography . ; musicals 1978 : a history of the american film 1979 : das lusitania songspiel 2002 : mrs . bob cratchit 's wild christmas binge 2007 : adrift in macao . awards and honors . he received obie awards for sister mary ignatius , the marriage of bette and boo and betty 's summer vacation . he received a nomination for a tony award for best book of a musical for a history of the american film , and he won a tony award for best play in 2013 for his play vanya and sonia and masha and spike . durang has been awarded numerous fellowships and high-profile grants including a guggenheim , a rockefeller , the cbs playwriting fellowship , the lecomte du nouy foundation grant , and the kenyon festival theatre playwriting prize . he is a member of the dramatists guild council . he was also a finalist for the pulitzer prize in drama in 2006 for miss witherspoon . on may 17 , 2010 he was presented with the very first luminary award from the new york innovative theatre awards for his work off-off-broadway . he was awarded the pen/laura pels international foundation for theater award in 2012 . that same year , he was inducted into the american theater hall of fame . . references . external links . bomb magazine interview with christopher durang by craig gholson christopher durang at the internet broadway database durang at internet off-broadway database christopher durang biography at tv.com