Leviathan (Hobbes book)

content . title . the title of hobbes 's treatise alludes to the leviathan mentioned in the book of job . in contrast to the simply informative titles usually given to works of early modern political philosophy , such as john locke 's two treatises of government or hobbes 's own earlier work the elements of law , hobbes selected a more poetic name for this more provocative treatise . lexicography in the early modern period believed that the term '' leviathan '' was associated with the hebrew words lavah , meaning '' to couple , connect , or join '' , and thannin , meaning '' a serpent or dragon '' . in the westminster assembly 's annotations on the bible , the interpreters believed that the creature was named using these root words '' because by his bignesse he seemes not one single creature , but a coupling of divers together ; or because his scales are closed , or straitly compacted together . '' samuel mintz suggests that these connotations lend themselves to hobbes 's understanding of political force since both '' leviathan and hobbes 's sovereign are unities compacted out of separate individuals ; they are omnipotent ; they can not be destroyed or divided ; they inspire fear in men ; they do not make pacts with men ; theirs is the dominion of power '' on pain of death . mintz , p . 5 . frontispiece . after lengthy discussion with thomas hobbes , the parisian abraham bosse created the etching for the book 's famous frontispiece in the géometrique style which bosse himself had refined . it is similar in organisation to the frontispiece of hobbes ' de cive ( 1642 ) , created by jean matheus . the frontispiece has two main elements , of which the upper part is by far the more striking . in it , a giant crowned figure is seen emerging from the landscape , clutching a sword and a crosier , beneath a quote from the book of job— '' non est potestas super terram quae comparetur ei . iob . 41 . 24 '' ( '' there is no power on earth to be compared to him . job 41 . 24 '' ) —further linking the figure to the monster of that book . ( due to disagreements over the precise location of the chapters and verses when they were divided in the late middle ages , the verse hobbes quotes is usually given as job 41:33 in modern christian translations into english , job 41:25 in the masoretic text , septuagint , and the luther bible ; it is job 41:24 in the vulgate . ) the torso and arms of the figure are composed of over three hundred persons , in the style of giuseppe arcimboldo ; all are facing away from the viewer , with just the giant 's head having visible facial features . ( a manuscript of leviathan created for charles ii in 1651 has notable differences – a different main head but significantly the body is also composed of many faces , all looking outwards from the body and with a range of expressions . ) the lower portion is a triptych , framed in a wooden border . the centre form contains the title on an ornate curtain . the two sides reflect the sword and crosier of the main figure – earthly power on the left and the powers of the church on the right . each side element reflects the equivalent power – castle to church , crown to mitre , cannon to excommunication , weapons to logic , and the battlefield to the religious courts . the giant holds the symbols of both sides , reflecting the union of secular , and spiritual in the sovereign , but the construction of the torso also makes the figure the state . part i : of man . hobbes begins his treatise on politics with an account of human nature . he presents an image of man as matter in motion , attempting to show through example how everything about humanity can be explained materialistically , that is , without recourse to an incorporeal , immaterial soul or a faculty for understanding ideas that are external to the human mind . hobbes proceeds by defining terms clearly and unsentimentally . good and evil are nothing more than terms used to denote an individual 's appetites and desires , while these appetites and desires are nothing more than the tendency to move toward or away from an object . hope is nothing more than an appetite for a thing combined with an opinion that it can be had . he suggests that the dominant political theology of the time , scholasticism , thrives on confused definitions of everyday words , such as incorporeal substance , which for hobbes is a contradiction in terms . hobbes describes human psychology without any reference to the summum bonum , or greatest good , as previous thought had done . not only is the concept of a summum bonum superfluous , but given the variability of human desires , there could be no such thing . consequently , any political community that sought to provide the greatest good to its members would find itself driven by competing conceptions of that good with no way to decide among them . the result would be civil war . however , hobbes states that there is a summum malum , or greatest evil . this is the fear of violent death . a political community can be oriented around this fear . since there is no summum bonum , the natural state of man is not to be found in a political community that pursues the greatest good . but to be outside of a political community is to be in an anarchic condition . given human nature , the variability of human desires , and need for scarce resources to fulfill those desires , the state of nature , as hobbes calls this anarchic condition , must be a war of all against all . even when two men are not fighting , there is no guarantee that the other will not try to kill him for his property or just out of an aggrieved sense of honour , and so they must constantly be on guard against one another . it is even reasonable to preemptively attack one 's neighbour . the desire to avoid the state of nature , as the place where the summum malum of violent death is most likely to occur , forms the polestar of political reasoning . it suggests a number of natural law , although hobbes is quick to point out that they can not properly speaking be called '' laws , '' since there is no one to enforce them . the first thing that reason suggests is to seek peace , but that where peace can not be had , to use all of the advantages of war . hobbes , leviathan , xiv.4 . hobbes is explicit that in the state of nature nothing can be considered just or unjust , and every man must be considered to have a right to all things . hobbes , leviathan , xiii.13 . the second law of nature is that one ought to be willing to renounce one 's right to all things where others are willing to do the same , to quit the state of nature , and to erect a commonwealth with the authority to command them in all things . hobbes concludes part one by articulating an additional seventeen laws of nature that make the performance of the first two possible and by explaining what it would mean for a sovereign to represent the people even when they disagree with the sovereign . part ii : of commonwealth . the purpose of a commonwealth is given at the start of part ii : the commonwealth is instituted when all agree in the following manner : i authorise and give up my right of governing myself to this man , or to this assembly of men , on this condition ; that thou give up , thy right to him , and authorise all his actions in like manner . the sovereign has twelve principal rights : hobbes , leviathan , xviii . because a successive covenant can not override a prior one , the subjects can not ( lawfully ) right of revolution . because the covenant forming the commonwealth results from social contract , the sovereign can not possibly breach the covenant ; and therefore the subjects can never argue to be freed from the covenant because of the actions of the sovereign . the sovereign exists because the majority has consented to his rule ; the minority have agreed to abide by this arrangement and must then assent to the sovereign 's actions . every subject is author of the acts of the sovereign : hence the sovereign can not injure any of his subjects and can not be accused of injustice . following this , the sovereign can not justly be regicide by the subjects . because the purpose of the commonwealth is peace , and the sovereign has the right to do whatever he thinks necessary for the preserving of peace and security and prevention of discord . therefore , the sovereign may judge what opinions and doctrines are averse , who shall be allowed to speak to multitudes , and who shall examine the doctrines of all books before they are published . to prescribe the rules of civil law and property . to be judge in all cases . to make war powers as he sees fit and to command the army . to choose counsellors , ministers , magistrates and officers . to reward with riches and honour or to punish with corporal or pecuniary punishment or ignominy . to establish laws about honour and a scale of worth . hobbes explicitly rejects the idea of separation of powers . in item 6 hobbes is explicitly in favour of censorship of the press and restrictions on the rights of free speech should they be considered desirable by the sovereign to promote order . types . there are three ( monarchy , aristocracy and democracy ) : and only three ; since unlike aristotle he does not sub-divide them into '' good '' and '' deviant '' : and monarchy is the best , on practical grounds : . succession . the right of succession always lies with the sovereign . democracies and aristocracies have easy succession ; monarchy is harder : because in general people have n't thought carefully . however , the succession is definitely in the gift of the monarch : but , it is not always obvious who the monarch has appointed : however , the answer is : and this means : note that ( perhaps rather radically ) this does not have to be any blood relative : however , practically this means : . religion . in leviathan , hobbes explicitly states that the sovereign has authority to assert power over matters of faith and doctrine and that if he does not do so , he invites discord . hobbes presents his own religious theory but states that he would defer to the will of the sovereign ( when that was re-established : again , leviathan was written during the civil war ) as to whether his theory was acceptable . hobbes ' materialistic presuppositions also led him to hold a view which was considered highly controversial at the time . hobbes rejected the idea of incorporeal substances and subsequently argued that even god himself was a corporeal substance . although hobbes never explicitly stated he was an atheist , many allude to the possibility that he is . taxation . hobbes also touched upon the sovereign 's ability to tax in leviathan , although he is not as widely cited for his economic theories as he is for his political theories . hobbes believed that equal justice includes the equal imposition of taxes . the equality of taxes does n't depend on equality of wealth , but on the equality of the debt that every man owes to the commonwealth for his defence and the maintenance of the rule of law . hobbes also championed public support for those unable to maintain themselves by labour , which would presumably be funded by taxation . he advocated public encouragement of works of navigation etc . to usefully employ the poor who could work . part iii : of a christian commonwealth . in part iii hobbes seeks to investigate the nature of a christian commonwealth . this immediately raises the question of which scriptures we should trust , and why . if any person may claim supernatural revelation superior to the civil law , then there would be chaos , and hobbes ' fervent desire is to avoid this . hobbes thus begins by establishing that we can not infallibly know another 's personal word to be divine revelation : this is good , but if applied too fervently would lead to all the bible being rejected . so , hobbes says , we need a test : and the true test is established by examining the books of scripture , and is : '' seeing therefore miracles now cease '' means that only the books of the bible can be trusted . hobbes then discusses the various books which are accepted by various sects , and the '' question much disputed between the diverse sects of christian religion , from whence the scriptures derive their authority '' . to hobbes , '' it is manifest that none can know they are god 's word ( though all true christians believe it ) but those to whom god himself hath revealed it supernaturally '' . and therefore '' the question truly stated is : by what authority they are made law ? '' unsurprisingly , hobbes concludes that ultimately there is no way to determine this other than the civil power : he discusses the ten commandments , and asks '' who it was that gave to these written tables the obligatory force of laws . there is no doubt but they were made laws by god himself : but because a law obliges not , nor is law to any but to them that acknowledge it to be the act of the sovereign , how could the people of israel , that were forbidden to approach the mountain to hear what god said to moses , be obliged to obedience to all those laws which moses propounded to them ? '' and concludes , as before , that '' making of the scripture law , belonged to the civil sovereign . '' finally : '' we are to consider now what office in the church those persons have who , being civil sovereigns , have embraced also the christian faith ? '' to which the answer is : '' christian kings are still the supreme pastors of their people , and have power to ordain what pastors they please , to teach the church , that is , to teach the people committed to their charge . '' there is an enormous amount of biblical scholarship in this third part . however , once hobbes ' initial argument is accepted ( that no-one can know for sure anyone else 's divine revelation ) his conclusion ( the religious power is subordinate to the civil ) follows from his logic . the very extensive discussions of the chapter were probably necessary for its time . the need ( as hobbes saw it ) for the civil sovereign to be supreme arose partly from the many sects that arose around the civil war , and to quash the pope of rome 's challenge , to which hobbes devotes an extensive section . part iv : of the kingdom of darkness . hobbes named part iv of his book kingdom of darkness . by this , hobbes does not mean hell ( he did not believe in hell or purgatory ) chapter xlvi : lastly , for the errors brought in from false or uncertain history , what is all the legend of fictitious miracles in the lives of the saints ; and all the histories of apparitions and ghosts alleged by the doctors of the roman church , to make good their doctrines of hell and purgatory , the power of exorcism , and other doctrines which have no warrant , neither in reason nor scripture ; as also all those traditions which they call the unwritten word of god ; but old wives ' fables ? , but the darkness of ignorance as opposed to the light of true knowledge . hobbes ' interpretation is largely unorthodox and so sees much darkness in what he sees as the misinterpretation of scripture . : this considered , the kingdom of darkness . is nothing else but a confederacy of deceivers that , to obtain dominion over men in this present world , endeavour , by dark and erroneous doctrines , to extinguish in them the light . hobbes enumerates four causes of this darkness . the first is by extinguishing the light of scripture through misinterpretation . hobbes sees the main abuse as teaching that the kingdom of god can be found in the church , thus undermining the authority of the civil sovereign . another general abuse of scripture , in his view , is the turning of consecration into conjuration , or silly ritual . the second cause is the demonology of the heathen poets : in hobbes 's opinion , demons are nothing more than constructs of the brain . hobbes then goes on to criticize what he sees as many of the practices of catholicism : '' now for the worship of saints , and icons , and relics , and other things at this day practiced in the church of rome , i say they are not allowed by the word of god '' . the third is by mixing with the scripture diverse relics of the religion , and much of the vain and erroneous greek philosophy , especially of aristotle . hobbes has little time for the various disputing sects of philosophers and objects to what people have taken '' from aristotle 's civil philosophy , they have learned to call all manner of commonwealths but the popular ( such as was at that time the state of athens ) , tyranny '' . at the end of this comes an interesting section ( darkness is suppressing true knowledge as well as introducing falsehoods ) , which would appear to bear on the discoveries of galileo galilei . '' our own navigations make manifest , and all men learned in human sciences now acknowledge , there are antipodes '' ( i.e . , the earth is round ) '' . nevertheless , men . have been punished for it by authority ecclesiastical . but what reason is there for it ? is it because such opinions are contrary to true religion ? that can not be , if they be true . '' however , hobbes is quite happy for the truth to be suppressed if necessary : if '' they tend to disorder in government , as countenancing rebellion or sedition ? then let them be silenced , and the teachers punished '' – but only by the civil authority . the fourth is by mingling with both these , false or uncertain traditions , and feigned or uncertain history . hobbes finishes by inquiring who benefits from the errors he diagnoses : : cicero maketh honourable mention of one of the cassii , a severe judge amongst the romans , for a custom he had in criminal causes , when the testimony of the witnesses was not sufficient , to ask the accusers , cui bono ; that is to say , what profit , honour , or other contentment the accused obtained or expected by the fact . for amongst presumptions , there is none that so evidently declareth the author as doth the benefit of the action . hobbes concludes that the beneficiaries are the churches and churchmen . see also . behemoth by thomas hobbes classical republicanism john locke scientia potentia est hobbes 's moral and political philosophy . references . further reading . editions of leviathan . leviathan . revised edition , eds . a.p . martinich and brian battiste . peterborough , on : broadview press , 2010 . leviathan : or the matter , forme , and power of a commonwealth ecclesiasticall and civill , ed . by ian shapiro ( yale university press ; 2010 ) . leviathan , critical edition by noel malcolm in three volumes : 1 . editorial introduction ; 2 and 3 . the english and latin texts , oxford university press , 2012 ( clarendon edition of the works of thomas hobbes ) . critical studies . bagby , laurie m . hobbes 's leviathan : reader 's guide , new york : continuum , 2007 . baumrin , bernard herbert ( ed . ) hobbes 's leviathan – interpretation and criticism belmont , ca : wadsworth , 1969 . cranston , maurice . '' the leviathan '' history today ( oct 1951 ) 1 10 pp 17-21 harrison , ross . hobbes , locke , and confusion 's empire : an examination of seventeenth-century political philosophy . cambridge university press , 2003 . hood , francis campbell . the divine politics of thomas hobbes – an interpretation of leviathan , oxford : clarendon press , 1964 . johnston , david . the rhetoric of leviathan – thomas hobbes and the politics of cultural transformation , princeton , n.j . : princeton university press , 1986 . newey , glen . routledge philosophy guidebook to hobbes and leviathan , new york : routledge , 2008 . rogers , graham alan john . leviathan – contemporary responses to the political theory of thomas hobbes bristol : thoemmes press , 1995 . schmitt , carl . the leviathan in the state theory of thomas hobbes – meaning and failure of a political symbol , chicago : the university of chicago press , 2008 ( earlier : greenwood press , 1996 ) . springborg , patricia . the cambridge companion to hobbes 's leviathan , cambridge : cambridge university press , 2007 . windolph , francis lyman . leviathan and natural law , princeton nj : princeton university press , 1951 . zagorin , perez . hobbes and the law of nature , princeton : princeton university press , 2009 . external links . reprint from the 1651 edition full text online at oregonstate.edu a reduced version of leviathan at earlymoderntexts.com scan of 1651 edition