Barrel racing

history . barrel racing originally developed as an event for women . in early barrel racing , the pattern alternated between a figure-eight and a cloverleaf pattern . the figure-eight was eventually dropped in favor of the more difficult cloverleaf . it is believed that competitive barrel racing was first held in texas . the women 's professional rodeo association ( wpra ) was developed in 1948 by a group of women from texas who were looking to make a home for themselves and women in general in the sport of rodeo . when it initially began , the wpra was called the girls rodeo association , with the acronym gra . it consisted of only 74 members , with as few as 60 approved tour events . the girls rodeo association was the first body of rodeo developed specifically for women . the gra eventually changed its name and officially became the wpra in 1981 , and the wpra still provides women competition opportunities in several rodeo events , but barrel racing remains the most popular . modern event . today barrel racing is a part of most rodeos up to the highest professional levels , and is also included at gymkhana ( equestrian ) events , which are generally amateur competitions open to riders of all ages and abilities . in amateur competition related speed events may be added , including the keyhole race and pole bending . barrel racing at this level is usually an event in which riders are grouped by age when they compete against each other . there are also open barrel racing jackpots , some open to all contestants no matter their age or gender . in barrel racing the main purpose is to run the pattern as fast as possible . the times are measured either by an electric eye , a device using a laser system to record times , or by a judge who drops a flag to let the timer know when to start and stop the clock . judges and timers are more commonly seen in local and non-professional events . the timer begins when horse and rider cross the starting line , and ends when the barrel pattern has been successfully executed and horse and rider cross the finish line . the rider 's time depends on several factors , most commonly the horse 's physical and mental condition , the rider 's horsemanship abilities , and the type of ground or footing ( the quality , depth , content , etc . of the sand or dirt in the arena ) . thumb beginning a barrel race , the horse and rider will enter the arena at top speed , through the center entrance ( or alley if in a rodeo arena ) . once in the arena , the electronic timer beam is crossed by the horse and rider . the timer keeps running until the beam is crossed again at the end of the run . modern barrel racing horses not only need to be fast , but also strong , agile , and intelligent . strength and agility are needed to maneuver the course in as little distance as possible . a horse that is able to '' hug the barrels '' as well as maneuver the course quickly and accurately follow commands , will be a horse with consistently fast times . . rules and pattern . in barrel racing , the fastest time wins . running past a barrel and off the pattern will result in a '' no time '' score and disqualification . if a barrel racer or her horse hits a barrel and knocks it over there is a time penalty of five seconds ( sometimes more ) , which usually will result in a time too slow to win . there is a sixty-second time limit to complete the course after time begins . contestants can not be required to start a run from an off-center alleyway , but contestants are not allowed to enter the arena and '' set '' the horse . at professional rodeos , it is required that the arena be harrowed after twelve contestants have run . barrels are required to be fifty-five gallons , metal , enclosed at both ends , and of at least two colors . competitors in the national barrel racing association ( nbra ) are required to wear a western long-sleeved shirt ( tucked in ) , western cut pants or jeans , western hat , and boots . competitors are required to abide by this dress code beginning one hour before the competition . standard barrel racing patterns require measured distances between the start line and the first barrel , from the first to the second barrel , and from the second to the third barrel . usually the established distances are as follows : 90 feet between barrel 1 and 2 . 105 feet between barrel 1 and 3 and between 2 and 3 . 60 feet from barrels 1 and 2 to score line . in a standard wpra pattern , the score line begins at the plane of arena , meaning from fence to fence regardless of the position of the electric eye or timer . in larger arenas , there is a maximum allowable distance of 105 feet between barrels 1 and 2 , and a maximum distance of 120 feet between barrels 2 and 3 , and 1 and 3 . barrels 1 and 2 must be at least 18 feet from the sides of the arena — in smaller arenas this distance may be less , but in no instance should the barrels be any closer than 15 feet from the sides of the arena . barrel 3 should be no closer than 25 feet from the end of the arena , and should be set no more than 15 feet longer than the first and second barrel . if arena size permits , barrels must be set 60 feet or further apart . in small arenas it is recommended the pattern be reduced proportionately to a standard barrel pattern . the above pattern is the set pattern for the women 's professional rodeo association ( wpra ) , and the national intercollegiate rodeo association ( nira ) . the national barrel horse association ( nbha ) use the following layout for governing patterns : a minimum of 15 feet between each of the first two barrels and the side fence . a minimum of 30 feet between the third barrel and the back fence . a minimum of 30 feet between the time line and the first barrel . competition technique . the approach to the first barrel is particularly critical . the rider can decide whether to go to the left or the right barrel first . each turn in barrel racing is , ideally , a relatively even half-circle around the barrel that takes about three strides . in approaching the second barrel , the horse must do a flying change of lead and rider must identify the correct spot to approach the turn around the second barrel . the turn around the third and final barrel is in the same direction as the second barrel . completing the third and final turn , horse and rider race for '' home '' , the line that stops the timer and ends the run . as the horse sets up to take the turn , the rider must be in position as well , sitting deeply in the saddle , using the inside hand to guide the horse through and around the barrel turn . the rider 's leg to the inside of the turn is held securely along the girth to support the horse 's rib cage and give them a focal point for the turn . the athleticism required for this maneuvering comes from optimum physical fitness of the rider and especially the horse . improper preparation for such a sport can cause injury to both horse and rider . injury can be avoided by using the proper protection for both horse and rider . associations and sanctioning bodies . thumb since its beginnings , the sport has developed over the years into a highly organized , exciting , and well-governed sport . the main sanctioning body of professional female rodeo athletes is the women 's professional rodeo association . today , the wpra boasts a total of over eight hundred sanctioned tour events with an annual payout of more than three million dollars . the wpra is divided into twelve divisional circuits . average and overall winners from their circuit compete at the ram national circuit finals rodeo . in the united states , two national organizations promote events for barrel racing alone : the national barrel horse association and better barrel races . the wpra is co-sanctioned with the prca ( professional rodeo cowboys association ) to allow women to compete in prca-endorsed rodeos . without the co-sanction , barrel racing would be removed from prca rodeos and the wrangler national finals rodeo . horses . the american quarter horse is the most commonly used horse breed . purchase price of a high caliber barrel racing horse can easily reach 25,000 , depending on the ability and individuality of the horse . while breeding is one major influence in the sale price of a horse , athletic ability , intelligence and drive , as well as the overall state of the economy , all play a role . prices can vary a great deal depending on market conditions . the highest-selling barrel racing horse sold at a public auction in 2009 sold for 68.000 . . tack and equipment . there are no specific bits required for barrel racing , although some bits are more common to barrel racers . the type used is determined by an individual horse 's needs . bits with longer shanks cause the horse to stop quicker than normal due to the additional leverage on the poll and jaw , while bits with shorter shanks provide better control for turns . curb chains , nosebands , and tiedowns are used as needed . typically , reins used in barrel racing competitions are a single looped rein . this allows the rider the ability to quickly recover the reins if dropped , unlike split reins . leather reins are widely used . these can be flat or braided , but both varieties have a tendency to become slippery when wet . reins made of synthetic materials are also available . a lightweight western saddle with a high pommel and cantle is ideal . forward hung stirrups also help to keep the rider 's feet in proper position . typically , riders choose a saddle that is up to a full size smaller than he or she would normally use . most importantly , it must fit the rider 's horse properly . saddle pads and cinches are chosen based on the horse 's size . . camas prairie stump race . thumb the camas prairie stump race is a barrel race which is also a match race : two horses race against each other on identical circuits opposite the start-finish line ; the riders start beside each other facing in opposite directions , and the first horse and rider back across the line win the race . the races continue until all but the last is eliminated . it is not a timed event . it is one of five game classes approved for horse club shows by the appaloosa horse club . the aphc rules state that racing competition is traditional to the nez perce native american people . however , it is unclear if this particular competition is derived from any traditional competition . injury issues . commonly , protective boots are worn on the horse 's front and hind legs to decrease the risk of potential injury . injuries can occur when horses or riders collide with a barrel , fall on a sharp turn , or have an accident in the crowded gate area outside of the arena . although equestrian helmets are not traditionally worn by riders , their use is slowly increasing , particularly since one championship-level rider debuted helmet use at the 2014 national finals rodeo . the metacarpophalangeal joint is the most frequently injured area in barrel horses . due to the nature of the tight turns of the pattern and abrupt changes of speed , the right forelimb appears to be subjected to more stress than the left , yet in radiographs , the left shows more abnormalities . at the fetlock , the medial sesamoid bones are more likely to suffer inflammation than the lateral . over time , some horses develop osteoarthritis . there are few studies on lameness in barrel horses , and most only examined horses known to be lame . . references . external links . national barrel horse association international barrel racing association women ’ s professional rodeo association national little britches rodeo association national high school rodeo association de : westernreiten barrel race