Hyponymy and hypernymy

hyponyms and hypernyms . hyponymy shows the relationship between a generic term ( hypernym ) and a specific instance of it ( hyponym ) . a hyponym is a word or phrase whose semantic field is more specific than its hypernym . the semantic field of a hypernym , also known as a superordinate , is broader than that of a hyponym . an approach to the relationship between hyponyms and hypernyms is to view a hypernym as consisting of hyponyms . this , however , becomes more difficult with abstract words such as imagine , understand and knowledge . while hyponyms are typically used to refer to nouns , it can also be used on other parts of speech . like nouns , hypernyms in verbs are words that refer to a broad category of actions . for example , verbs such as stare , gaze , view and peer can also be considered hyponyms of the verb look , which is their hypernym . hypernyms and hyponyms are asymmetric . hyponymy can be tested by substituting x and y in the sentence '' x is a kind of y '' and determining if it makes sense . for example , '' a screwdriver is a kind of tool '' makes sense , but not '' a tool is a kind of screwdriver '' . strictly speaking , the meaning relation between hyponyms and hypernyms applies to lexical items of the same word class ( or parts of speech ) , and holds between senses rather than words . for instance , the word screwdriver used in the previous example refers to screwdriver , and not to screwdriver ( cocktail ) . hyponymy is a transitive relation , if x is a hyponym of y , and y is a hyponym of z , then x is a hyponym of z . for example , violet is a hyponym of purple and purple is a hyponym of color ; therefore violet is a hyponym of color . a word can be both a hypernym and a hyponym : for example purple is a hyponym of color but itself is a hypernym of the broad spectrum of shades of purple between the range of crimson and violet . the hierarchical structure of semantic fields can be mostly seen in hyponymy . they could be observed from top to bottom , where the higher level is more general and the lower level is more specific . for example , living things will be the highest level followed by plants and animals , and the lowest level may comprise dog , cat and wolf . under the relations of hyponymy and incompatibility , taxonomic hierarchical structures too can be formed . it consists of two relations ; the first one being exemplified in '' an x is a y '' ( simple hyponymy ) while the second relation is '' an x is a kind/type of y '' . the second relation is said to be more discriminating and can be classified more specifically under the concept of taxonomy . . co-hyponyms . if the hypernym z consists of hyponyms x and y , x and y are identified as co-hyponyms . co-hyponyms are labelled as such when separate hyponyms share the same hypernym but are not hyponyms of one another , unless they happen to be synonymous . for example , screwdriver , scissors , knife , and hammer are all co-hyponyms of one another and hyponyms of tool , but not hyponyms of one another : '' a hammer is a type of knife '' is false . co-hyponyms are often but not always related to one another by the relation of incompatibility . for example , apple , peach and plum are co-hyponyms of fruit . however , an apple is not a peach , which is also not a plum . thus , they are incompatible . nevertheless , co-hyponyms are not necessarily incompatible in all senses . a queen and mother are both hyponyms of woman but there is nothing preventing the queen from being a mother . this shows that compatibility may be relevant . autohyponyms . a word is an autohyponym if it is used for both a hypernym and its hyponym . for example , the word dog describes both the species canis familiaris and male individuals of canis familiaris , so it is possible to say '' that dog is n't a dog , it 's a bitch '' ( '' that hypernym z is n't a hyponym z , it 's a hyponym y '' ) . the term '' autohyponym '' was coined by linguist laurence r . horn in a 1984 paper , ambiguity , negation , and the london school of parsimony . linguist ruth kempson had already observed that if there are hyponyms for one part of a set but not another , the hypernym can complement the existing hyponym by being used for the remaining part . for example , fingers describe all digits on a hand , but the existence of the word thumb for the first finger means that fingers can also be used for '' non-thumb digits on a hand '' . autohyponymy is also called '' vertical polysemy '' . horn called this '' licensed polysemy '' , but found that autohyponyms also formed even when there is no other hyponym . yankee is autohyponymous because it is a hyponym ( native of new england ) and its hypernym ( native of the united states ) , even though there is no other hyponym of yankee ( as native of the united states ) that means '' not a native of new england '' . similarly , the verb to drink ( a beverage ) is a hypernym for to drink ( an alcoholic beverage ) . in some cases , autohyponyms duplicate existing , distinct hyponyms . the hypernym '' smell '' ( to emit any smell ) has a hyponym '' stink '' ( to emit a bad smell ) , but is autohyponymous because '' smell '' can also mean '' to emit a bad smell '' , even though there is no '' to emit a smell that is n't bad '' hyponym . . hyperonym or hypernym . both hyperonym and hypernym are in use in linguistics . the form hypernym takes the -o- of hyponym as a part of hypo in the same way as in the contrast between hypertension and hypotension . however , etymologically the -o- is part of the greek stem ónoma . in other combinations with this stem , e.g . synonym , it is never elided . therefore , hyperonym is etymologically more faithful than hypernym . hyperonymy is used , for instance , by john lyons , who does not mention hypernymy and prefers superordination . lyons , john ( 1977 ) , semantics , vol . 1 , p . 291 the nominalization hyperonymy is rarely used , because the neutral term to refer to the relationship is hyponymy . a practical reason to prefer hyperonym is that hypernym is in its spoken form hard to distinguish from hyponym in most dialects of english . usage . computer science often terms this relationship an '' is-a '' relationship . for example , the phrase '' red is-a color '' can be used to describe the hyponymic relationship between red and color . hyponymy is the most frequently encoded relation among synsets used in lexical databases such as wordnet . these semantic relations can also be used to compare semantic similarity by judging the distance between two synsets and to analyse anaphora . as a hypernym can be understood as a more general word than its hyponym , the relation is used in semantic compression by generalization to reduce a level of specialization . the notion of hyponymy is particularly relevant to language translation , as hyponyms are very common across languages . for example , in japanese the word for older brother is , and the word for younger brother is . an english-to-japanese translator presented with a phrase containing the english word brother would have to choose which japanese word equivalent to use . this would be difficult , because abstract information ( such as the speakers ' relative ages ) is often not available during machine translation .