Pow-wow (folk magic)

origins and practices . early colonial pennsylvania was a melting pot of various european religious influences , as william penn 's promise of religious tolerance opened the doors for many christian sects : the anabaptists , quakers , lutherans , german reformed , catholics , and all manner of religious mystics and free-thinkers . it is from this blending that the pennsylvania german powwow tradition was born . although the majority of the pennsylvania dutch were protestant , their folk religious culture was deeply rooted in practices of the pre-reformation era , such as the veneration of the saints , the use of folk adaptations of liturgical blessings for everyday purposes , and the use of sacred objects and inscriptions for healing and protection . these practices were brought to north america , and formed the basis of both oral and literary ritual traditions in pennsylvania . the majority of the early ritual traditions of the pennsylvania dutch were rooted in german language , but the term '' powwow '' became widely used by speakers of english by the late 18th century . '' powwaw '' ( in one of its early spellings ) was appropriated from the algonquian language by 17th century missionaries in new england , where it originally described a healer , derived from a verb implying trance , or dreaming for divination or healing purposes . evidence suggests that the term was applied to the pennsylvania dutch out of a perceived similarity in ritual healing , consistent with its borrowed meaning in english for '' conjuration performed for the cure of diseases and other purposes . '' later , at the turn of the 20th century , the term '' powwow '' became associated with the title of the english edition of a celebrated manual of ritual procedures , entitled pow-wows ; or , long lost friend , written by john george hohman and first published in german as der lange verborgene freund ( literally '' the long hidden friend '' ) in reading , pennsylvania in 1820 . the tradition is also called braucherei , or simply brauche , in pennsylvania dutch ; an adept is referred to as a '' powwower '' or braucher , though not all practitioners use the same terminology . the verb brauche means '' to use , to employ , to make use of , to need , '' while braucherei implies a collection of traditional ways , related to '' breiche - of customs , traditions , rituals , ceremonies . '' . powwow literature . the bible is considered the most important book of the powwow , and no practitioner would work without their bible on hand . in addition , several popular grimoires are also utilized , primarily the romanus-buchlein and egyptian secrets of albertus magnus . important to some practitioners was the work the sixth and seventh books of moses , a magical text attributed to moses and claimed as an esoteric sequel to the biblical five books of moses , or pentateuch . various versions of the work can be traced to 18th and 19th century german sources , while an english translation was published in new york in 1880 by the german antiquarian , johann scheible . however , the majority of practitioners were superstitiously fearful of this work and believed it invoked all manner of evil and devilry , as explained in the red church by author and braucher christopher bilardi . an excerpt from the sixth and seventh books of moses , which many powwowers find as justification for the christian practice of powwowing , reads : one thing must not be omitted , in conclusion , and that is , we must first become christians before we can perform cures by christian methods . very few are really christians who call themselves such ; they are only christians in name and appearance . the art of healing , according to scriptural principles , deserves special mention in this place , in more than one respect , not only because something truly magical takes place therein , but because scriptural healing is often regarded as the only true one . the principles of this art of healing have been fully established according to certain declarations and doctrines of the bible . people who practiced powwowing were often women who used prayer as well as locally accepted folk remedies . because these were individualized prayers and not rote incantations the practice was seen as acceptable among the most devout christians and was very popular well into the 1940s . the origins of a majority of the charms and spells utilized by the powwow are generally agreed upon to be remnants of medieval folk charms used by superstitious catholics against illness and witchery . it is primarily understood by practitioners of the powwow tradition that powwow is an americanized version of english cunning craft : another characteristic practice of powwow magic is the himmelsbrief or '' heaven 's letter '' . significantly , the long lost friend assures its owner that : whoever carries this book with him , is safe from all his enemies , visible or invisible ; and whoever has this book with him can not die without the holy corpse of jesus christ , nor drowned in any water , nor burn up in any fire , nor can any unjust sentence be passed upon him . so help me . . quotations . a sure means to staunch blood . it is helpful , though the person is far absent , if the one who uses this means for him , pronounces his name aright . cure for the headache . tame thou flesh and bone , like christ in paradise ; and you who will assist thee , this i tell thee ( name ) for your repentance sake . + + + this you must say three times , each time lasting for three minutes , and your headache will soon cease . but if your headache is caused by strong drink , or otherwise will not leave you soon , then you must repeat these words every minute . this , however , is not necessary in regard to headache . . to remove bruises and pains . . to pull the heat from burns . . in popular culture . the tradition of hex signs painted on pennsylvania barns in some areas is believed by some to relate to this tradition ; the paintings consisted of geometric star patterns thought to have amuletic properties , though many hex signs are made simply for decoration . some scholars disagree with this claim , however , and believe the hex signs are the natural progression of german fraktur art . ( need better citation for this claim ) the 1988 film , apprentice to murder , stars donald sutherland as '' powwow '' doctor john reese , and chad lowe as his young apprentice billy kelly . reese practices the folk magic rituals in a small pennsylvania town whose residents believe they have fallen under a curse . the film makes use of pow wows or the long lost friend cited above . see also . hex sign pentagram dowsing pow wow , a gathering of native americans . references . . external links . powwowing : a persistent american esoteric tradition by dr . david w . kreibel powwowing in pennsylvania : healing rituals of the dutch country e-text of powwows , or , the long lost friend e-text of the sixth book of moses e-text of the seventh book of moses a himmelsbrief text another himmelsbrief text pa dutch powwow traditional pennsylvania dutch powwowing