WonderSwan

technical specifications . the main cpu of the wonderswan is a 16-bit nec v30 mz . the original model 's screen is capable of displaying up to eight shades of gray , in contrast to the four displayed by the wonderswan 's main competitor , the game boy . similar to the atari lynx , the handheld has an extra set of buttons allowing the console to be played at different angles ; for the wonderswan , these buttons were used to allow gamers to play games in both the portrait and landscape orientations . the wonderswan series are all powered by a single aa battery , with the original monochrome version having a battery life of 40 hours . it also allows players to record their personal information , such as their name , birth date , and blood type , which then can be accessed and used by the game . its lcd screen is and displays at a resolution of 224 × 144 . its sound capabilities consist of four pcm channels , each of which can play 32-sample , 4-bit sounds at selectable volume and pitch levels . the physical measurements of the wonderswan color are , slightly larger than the original wonderswan , and it weighs . its cpu is a 3.072 & nbsp ; mhz nec v30 mz , and it includes 512 kbit of ram , which is shared between the video ram and the work ram . the screen on the wonderswan color can display up to 241 colors out of a palette of 4096 , and up to 28 sprites per line . it offers backward compatibility with all previous wonderswan titles . its lcd screen is also larger than that of the original wonderswan , measuring . the wonderswan color has an approximate battery life of 20 hours . the swancrystal improves upon the design of the wonderswan color through the use of a tft lcd monitor , which has a superior response time to the fstn monitor used in the former system . this helped to reduce motion blur in the handheld 's graphics . the unit 's case was also redesigned to be more durable . its approximate battery life is 15 hours . the original wonderswan 's cartridges were solid black in color , while the wonderswan color 's cartridges were clear . games for the original wonderswan would not have color on a wonderswan color , and would display in its original grayscale . several features and accessories were developed for the wonderswan . the wonderwitch is an official software development kit aimed at amateur programmers that was released by qute corporation . it sold at a cost of and allows for games to be developed in the c programming language . an adapter was created to connect headphones to the handheld , as the wonderswan lacks a headphone port . a remote-controlled robot known as the wonderborg can be operated through the unit . in addition , the handheld can be connected to a pocketstation , a memory card peripheral for the playstation console , through a device known as the wonderwave . the wonderswan and its later models were also capable of connecting to the internet via a mobile phone network . . game library . image : gunpey ws screenshot.jpg thumb right a screenshot of gunpey for the original wonderswan . gunpey was named for gunpei yokoi , developer of the system . koto laboratories claims that the wonderswan sold 10 million game cartridges in all . in developing games for the wonderswan , bandai leveraged the assistance of several developers . banpresto—part-owned by bandai at the time—added support by way of anime licenses and licensed titles , while namco and capcom also developed titles for the handheld . squaresoft contributed remakes of final fantasy , final fantasy ii , and final fantasy iv which later also came to the game boy advance . taito contributed well-received ports such as space invaders and densha de go ! . bandai augmented these releases with games of its own , including exclusive titles in the digimon and gundam franchises . to compete with tetris , gunpei yokoi developed a puzzle game for the system ultimately named gunpey in his honor . a sequel known as gunpey ex was a launch title for the wonderswan color . certain games produced through the wonderwitch kit , such as judgement silversword , have also been noted as excellent titles . support for the wonderswan has been considered underwhelming . although some well known third-party developers supported the console , most publishers continued to exclusively support nintendo 's handhelds . the departure of squaresoft as a developer and its return to nintendo has been cited as a factor in the wonderswan 's diminishing sales in later years . after the discontinuation of the wonderswan in 2003 , several developers ported wonderswan games to the game boy advance . . reception . selling 3.5 million units , the wonderswan only picked up 8 % of the marketshare in japan and was ultimately outperformed by nintendo 's game boy advance . due to its brightly colored screen and deep game library , the game boy advance ensured nintendo would have a near-monopoly on the handheld console market in japan until the release of the playstation portable by sony in 2004 . retrospective feedback to the handheld praises its accomplishments but defines it as a '' niche '' device that appeals to only certain gamers . writing for usgamer , jeremy parish considers the wonderswan the ultimate expression of gunpei yokoi 's design philosophy and notes its modest impact on the market , but blames bandai for its lack of success , stating , '' while wonderswan ultimately will be remembered as a highly localized blip in the history of handheld games , as a platform it genuinely held its own . the system 's obscurity resulted more from poor timing and bandai 's strangely meek strategy , not from any inherent flaws in the design of the machine itself . '' parish also goes on to hypothesize on the lack of a wonderswan release in north america , stating , '' given how hard it was to find neo geo pocket systems and games at u.s . retail , it 's hard to imagine they were clamoring for yet another niche portable from japan . '' luke plunkett from kotaku praised the wonderswan 's challenge to nintendo , stating , '' t tried some pretty unique and interesting things , and put up a much sterner fight than most other handhelds ever managed . '' retro gamers kim wild criticizes some aspects of the handheld , including its lack of a headphone and ac port , as well as its poor control scheme for left-handed individuals and inability to play multiplayer link games with the headphone adapter connected . wild offers some praise for the handheld , however , stating '' what bandai managed with the wonderswan was impressive given the competition . the low price even today makes it more than worthy of consideration . '' . notes . references . external links . ( archive )