Napton on the Hill

manor . the toponym napton is derived from the old english cnæpp meaning 'hilltop ' and tūn meaning 'settlement ' in the old english language . in 1086 the domesday book recorded the village as neptone . the hill on which the village is built is just over above sea level , commanding the remainder of the parish which for the most part is at a height of about . the domesday book records that in 1086 robert de beaumont , count of meulan held the principal manor of napton . in 1107 henry i made de beaumont earl of leicester and de beaumont 's manor at napton became part of the honour of leicester . when robert de beaumont , 4th earl of leicester died in 1204 leaving no male heir his estates were divided between his two sisters . napton was included in the half that passed to his younger sister margaret , and thereby to her husband saer de quincy who in 1207 was made earl of winchester . napton was still part of the honour of winchester in 1271 but roger de quincy , 2nd earl of winchester had died in 1265 with no male heir , leaving his estates to his three daughters . in 1285 the husbands of two of these , alexander comyn , earl of buchan and william de ferrers , 5th earl of derby , jointly claimed view of frankpledge over napton . there are further references to napton 's feudal overlordship in the 14th century and in 1413 . . parish church . the oldest parts of the church of england parish church of st lawrence include the chancel , which was built in the 12th century and still has three norman windows in its north wall . the south doorway of the nave is also from the end of the 12th century . prof . louis salzman considered that the north and south transepts were also 12th century but prof . nikolaus pevsner and alexandra wedgwood proposed a later date of about 1275 , noting their triplets of early english gothic lancet windows . the north and south aisles were added in the 13th century after the transepts . the lower stages of the bell tower date from about 1300 . the east window of the south transept is a later perpendicular gothic addition . the south porch reuses a mixture of early english and perpendicular masonry and has puzzled historians . salzman thought it could have been built either at the end of the 16th century or in the 17th century but pevsner and wedgwood suspected the involvement of j . croft , the architect who restored the church in 1861 . the vestry may also have been added in the 17th century and the upper stage of the tower was rebuilt early in the 18th century . after this rebuilding a ring of five bells was cast in 1731 and hung in the tower . the tenor was recast in 1874 and john taylor & co rehung all the bells in 1958 . the ring was increased to six bells by the addition of the treble cast by whitechapel bell foundry in 1963 . st . lawrence 's is at the top of the hill , making it a local landmark and giving it commanding views over the surrounding countryside , especially from the top of the tower . st . lawrence 's parish is now part of a single benefice church of england with the parishes of lower shuckburgh and stockton , on the hill-st-lawrence/ napton on the hill – st . lawrence , napton on the hill part of the bridges group of parishes . the bridges group actor ed bishop is buried in the churchyard . economic and social history . in the 14th century napton was granted a market charter by king edward ii and throughout the middle ages it was one of the largest settlements in warwickshire . however the market died out , and the population of the village today of around 1,000 , is roughly the same as it was in the year 1400 . napton had a windmill by 1543 . the present stone-built tower mill is a later structure that was derelict in 1966 but has since been restored . napton had separate schools for girls and boys until 1948 when they were merged to form the current st . lawrence church of england primary school , which moved to its current premises in 1997 . . canals . the first section of the oxford canal from hawkesbury junction was completed in 1771 and it reached napton in 1774 . this made napton the head of navigation for coal supplies to be forwarded by road to banbury , bicester , woodstock and oxford until 1777 , when the canal reached fenny compton which then took over as the trans-shipment point . the oxford canal 's chief engineer , samuel simcock , designed the canal to be a contour canal as much as possible , so he routed it around three sides of napton hill to minimise the number of locks needed . even so , to climb from napton wharf to the summit pound at marston doles required eight locks around the hill ( nos . 8–15 ) and another at marston doles ( no . 16 ) , that between them raise boats by a total of . the long summit pound between marston doles and claydon , oxfordshire suffered from a shortage of water so parliament passed an act in 1786 authorising the company to use any water supply within of the canal . just over south of napton it sank a well that fed the summit pound via a feeder arm westwards to the canal between locks 11 and 12 and then a channel beside the canal from there to just above marston doles lock . an engine house with a steam engine and pump were built at the well-head and the well seems to have begun operation in 1793 . the boiler needed replacement as early as 1794 and an accident with the engine killed a workman in 1796 . in 1800 the warwick and napton canal ( w & n ) was completed , joining the oxford canal at napton junction . to reach the same level as the oxford canal the w & n ascended three locks at calcutt just north of napton parish . with each passage of a narrowboat through calcutt locks the oxford canal lost a certain amount of water so the w & n agreed to pay the oxford £sd ( 10 new pence ) for each such passage . in 1805 the grand junction canal was completed , joining the oxford canal at braunston east of napton and completing the direct canal route between birmingham and london . between 1808 and 1811 the w & n built a reservoir at ashby st ledgers from napton to feed both the oxford and the w & n via the grand junction . this enabled the oxford to cease regular pumping at napton and stop charging the w & n two shillings for each boat through calcutt locks . a century later , in autumn 1911 , the canals again suffered a water shortage so the oxford canal brought its well at napton back into use . the old pumping engine had long been out of action so the company hired two oxford steam plough company steam ploughing engines to work the pump . in 1974 there was another water shortage and british waterways resorted to back-pumping water up napton locks . in 1928 the grand junction canal took over the w & n and warwick and birmingham canals to form the grand union canal . the grand union wanted to widen its route to enable it to take barges wide , so in 1931 an act of parliament gave the grand union special powers over the oxford canal to widen the section between braunston and napton junctions . between 1932 and 1947 it widened bridges between braunston and napton and increased the depth of the canal to . the canals are now primarily a leisure facility and napton junction has a marina that offers moorings and narrowboats for hire . napton narrowboats . amenities . napton fc plays at dog lane sports field . as of june 2014 the club only has a veterans side . public houses in the village : the folly the folly the crown is closed and now a domestic dwelling the king 's head ( hook norton brewery ) the bridge inn is now closed and a domestic dwelling the victory club there is a christadelphian meeting hall in the village . napton festival . on 16 september 2006 the first napton festival was held at holt farm on holt road . the headline act was the hard rock band girlschool . the festival was repeated in the same place in 2007 , with two stages and with sweet and the hollies as its main acts . in 2008 the main acts were bad company on the main stage and aynsley lister in the marquee . the 2008 festival extended to the friday night with jilted generation performing in the marquee . smaller events were held in napton village 2009 and 2010 , both headlined by whole lotta dc . in 2011 the festival was held in a new site on the edge of napton village . it was a two-day event with bands including the ripps on the friday night and the bluetones and the total stone roses headlining the saturday night . notable people . the bbc 's rural affairs correspondent and director of checked shirt tv limited , tom heap , the son of the foreign and commonwealth office 's john arnfield heap , lives in the village . the american actor ed bishop ( 1932–2005 ) is buried in the parish churchyard , having lived in the village for several years . references . sources .