Alagoas

etymology . , under the spelling lagona . the portuguese lagoa under the spelling lagona ( perhaps lagõna ) , is documented in the 14th century , and alternated with the other for a long time ; the prosthesis is then explained by the introduction of the article , chiefly in locution ( na lagoa , vindo da lagoa ) ( in the lake , coming from the lake ) , and for morphologic regularization with the derivatives of the verb alagar ( to inundate ) ( alagadiço , alagado , alagador , alagamento , etc . ) ( swampish , waterlogged , flooding , overflow , etc . ) . the name appears as a competitor with the names of the lagoons of manguaba , a lagoa do sul ( '' the southern lagoon '' ) , and mundaú , a lagoa do norte ( '' the northern lagoon '' ) , already in the 16th century , when settlements were founded near the alagoa do norte and the alagoa do sul , the alagoas , with the inclusion of the rest of the lagoons in the area . why alagoas ? official site of the civil cabinet of the state of alagoas . pageg visited on august 16 , 2011 . the suffix -ano is characteristic of brazil ( paraíba ) , pernambuco , alagoano , sergipe , bahia , goiás , and later acriano . . geography . image : maceio alagoas brasil.png thumb left summer in maceió . the state 's name originates with the lakes along its coast near the city of maceió . the coast is bordered by fringing reefs and many fine beaches . behind the beaches , sometimes only hundreds of meters and defined by steep scarps , lies a stretch of green coastal hills having enough rainfall for considerable agriculture and scarce remnants of the mata atlântica ( atlantic rain forest ) that now is largely limited to steep hill tops or steep valley sides and bottoms . this is the area long dominated by sugar cane . still farther inland lies the sertão of the northeast region of the nation . the sertão is a high dry region dominated by scrub that is often thorn-filled and sometimes toxic , the caatinga . this area and its people are famed in legend and song . it is the land of the cowboy who is clad from head to toe ( if he is lucky ) with very thick leather to avoid the sharp vegetation . history . : see also : image : museu de arte sacra do convento de santa maria ( marechal deodoro , al ) . jpg thumb right convent of santa maria , marechal deodoro . during the first three centuries of its history , alagoas was part of the captaincy of pernambuco , only changing into an independent captaincy in 1817 . as a reprisal against the pernambucan revolution , the king joão vi of portugal ordered a vast portion of the pernambucan territory to be taken from it , most including its southern portion , one part given to the captaincy of bahia , the other portion made independent and creating alagoas as a new brazilian captaincy . initially , in the first years of the 16th century , alagoas settlement went on slowly , however helped by africans turned into slaves whose work urged the local economy . in the period of the 16th and 17th centuries , french pirates invaded its territory attracted by the commerce of brazil wood . some time later , duarte coelho , owner of the captaincy of pernambuco , gave the control of the region back to the portuguese , running the territory as part of his captaincy . he increased the number of sugar cane plantations and built some sugar mills , as well as founding the cities of penedo and alagoas – this last one originally baptized by portuguese as santa maria madalena da alagoa do sul ( saint mary magdalene of the southern lake ) , currently the historic heritage town of marechal deodoro . in 1570 , a second expedition ordered by duarte coelho and led by cristóvão lins , explored the north of alagoas and founded the settlement of porto calvo and five sugar mills , which two of them still endure , buenos aires and escurial . in 1630 , the territory was taken by the dutch , whose interest was to manage the commerce of sugarcane in most parts of the northeastern region of brazil . as part of one of the wealthiest brazilian captaincies , alagoas prospered along with the sugar trade . they built fort maurits in penedo , on the river são francisco . however , the dutch colonizers abandoned the territory after being defeated in 1646 . decades before alagoas was formed in 1817 , its sugar industry had 200 mills , and agriculture also involved cotton , tobacco and corn plantations . with brazilian independence from portugal in 1822 , alagoas becomes a province . in 1839 , the capital of the province was changed definitively from the town of alagoas to maceio , mainly due to the increasing growth of the city because of its port . demographics . image : maceio02.jpg thumb pajuçara beach in maceió . according to the ibge of 2008 , there were 3,173,000 people residing in the state . the population density was 109.9 inhabitants/km 2 . urbanization : 67.4 % ( 2006 ) ; population growth : 1.3 % ( 1991–2000 ) ; houses : 779,000 ( 2006 ) . source : pnad . the last pnad ( national research for sample of domiciles ) census revealed the following numbers : 2,100,000 brown ( multiracial ) people ( 66.18 % ) , 964,000 white people ( 30.39 % ) , 96,000 black people ( 3.02 % ) , 11,000 asian people ( 0.35 % ) . according to a genetic study from 2013 , brazilians in alagoas have 53.7 % european , 26.6 % african and 18.7 % amerindian ancestries , respectively . . largest cities . . statistics . vehicles : 287,018 ( march 2007 ) mobile phones : 1.4 million ( april 2007 ) telephones : 302,000 ( april 2007 ) cities : 102 ( 2007 ) . source : ibge . homicides : 60 per 100,000 inhabitants . economy . image : pv2.jpg thumb left ponta verde beach in maceió . alagoas is one of the poorest states of brazil and its hdi is the country 's worst . list of brazilian states by human development index the service sector is the largest component of gdp at 55.8 % , followed by the industrial sector at 36.9 % . agriculture represents 7.3 % , of gdp ( 2004 ) . alagoas exports : sugar 58.8 % , alcohol 29.4 % , chemicals 9 % , tobacco 2.1 % ( 2002 ) . share of the brazilian economy : 0.7 % ( 2004 ) . the economy has been agriculture , dependent largely on large sugarcane plantations with some tobacco farming that is concentrated around the city of arapiraca . sugar cane formed the basis for an alcohol industry that is in decline . small to medium-sized tanker ships took alcohol on board in maceio 's port with considerable frequency during the peak period . such loads still take place with less frequency . another local industry is based on chemical products from brine pumped from deep wells on the outskirts of maceió . in the last twenty years the tourism industry has found the beaches and maceió itself has changed from a rather sleepy little port with coconut palm plantations along its beaches to high-rise hotels . the northern coast , particularly around the towns maragogi and japaratinga is beginning to see some of this development in the form of resorts attracting people from the south and from europe . there is considerable european investment ( as of 2007 ) in beach property north of maceió with walled compounds of beach homes . education . image : ufal geo.jpg thumb right federal university of alagoas in maceió . portuguese is the official national language , and thus the primary language taught in schools . but english and spanish are part of the official high school curriculum . educational institutions . universidade federal de alagoas ( ufal ) ( federal university of alagoas ) ; universidade estadual de alagoas ( uneal ) ( state university of alagoas ) ; universidade de ciências da saúde de alagoas ( uncisal ) ( university of sciences of the health of alagoas ) ; instituto federal de alagoas ( ifal ) ; centro de ensino superior de maceió ( cesmac ) ( center of higher education of maceió ) ; faculdade de alagoas ( fal ) ( college of alagoas ) ; and many others . culture . festa junina ( saint john festival ) . festa junina was introduced to northeastern brazil by the portuguese for whom st john 's day ( also celebrated as midsummer day in several european countries ) , on 24 june , is one of the oldest and most popular celebrations of the year . differently , of course , from what happens on the european midsummer day , the festivities in brazil do not take place during the summer solstice but during the tropical winter solstice . the festivities traditionally begin after the 12th of june , on the eve of st anthony 's day , and last until the 29th , which is saint peter 's day . during these fifteen days , there are bonfires , fireworks , and folk dancing in the streets ( step names are in french , which shows the mutual influences between court life and peasant culture in the 17th , 18th , and 19th-century europe ) . once exclusively a rural festivity , today , in brazil , it is largely a city festival during which people joyfully and theatrically mimic peasant stereotypes and cliches in a spirit of joke and good time . typical dishes and drinks are served . like during carnival , these festivities involve costumes-wearing ( in this case , peasant costumes ) , dancing and visual spectacles ( fireworks display and folk dancing ) . like what happens on midsummer and st john 's day in europe , bonfires are a central part of these festivities in brazil . carnival . the four-day period before lent leading up to ash wednesday is carnival time in brazil . people of diverse origins or social classes forget their cares as they party in the streets . warrior . this is a typical alagoas revelry that resulted from the union of reisado ( an epiphany celebration ) , auto dos caboclinhos ( caboclinhos ’ play ) , chegança ( public folk play depicting a naval battle ) and pastoril ( outdoor folk play ) . its captivating choreography and costumes with colored ribbons and beads reproduce the cathedral ’ s façades on the monumental hats covered with mirrors . image : pajuçara.jpg thumb right pajuçara beach in maceió . fandango . this is a dramatic dance motivated by the sea . it tells the sea adventures of the first navigators in its songs accompanied by guitar and ukulele . carnival bull . boi do carnaval is a popular culture display derived from bumba-meu-boi . it is always presented together with la ursa ( the bear ) , vaqueiro ( cowboy ) and a percussion band whose rhythms captivate all who hear them . infrastructure . international airport . alagoas gained a new airport complex , zumbi dos palmares international airport , in maceió metropolitan area , designed by homegrown architect mário aloísio , which combines glass , metal and granite . it includes space for art exhibitions , a panoramic deck , chapel , seven escalators , nine elevators and four boarding bridges . the whole terminal was designed to permit access by the physically disabled , with ramps and special bathroom fixtures . in the new terminal , infraero also brings to maceió '' aeroshopping '' – a concept that is transforming the country 's airports into centers for leisure and high-quality products and services . the entire building has a computerized air conditioning , with commercial spaces that will be occupied gradually . the parking area was more than tripled . demand will be able to grow to 1.2 million passengers a year since the new passenger terminal has 24,000 square meters , the triple of its former size . the check-in counters were doubled and can reach higher numbers without any structural remodeling . the building is '' intelligent '' , meaning controlled by a computerized system that regulates factors ranging from the lighting level to air temperature and even the speed of the escalators . this system also controls access to restricted areas and the fire protection system , among others . thumb . highways . br-101 br-104 br-110 br-316 br-423 br-424 . port . the port of jaraguá is located in maceió . the commercial and economic development of the port of jaraguá , on the margins of the mundaú lagoon , was responsible for the emergence of an important settlement that received the name of maceió and later became the present capital of alagoas . the port of jaraguá is situated in a natural port area that facilitates the ships docking . during the colonial brazil , the most important products exported through the port were sugar , tobacco , coconut and spices . sports . alagoas provides visitors and residents with various sport activities . there are several football clubs based in the state , such as asa de arapiraca , crb , csa , murici , coruripe , cse , santa rita , penedense and ipanema . maceió was one of the 18 candidates to host games of the 2014 fifa world cup , for which brazil is the selected host , but it did not make the final cut . major cities . image : maceio01.jpg thumb right maceió is the largest city in alagoas . arapiraca coruripe maceió maragogi marechal deodoro ( h ) palmeira dos indios penedo ( h ) piranhas ( h ) porto calvo porto de pedras ( h ) são miguel dos campos santana do ipanema união dos palmares viçosa . notable people . aurélio buarque de holanda ferreira - lexicographer , philologist , translator , and writer renan calheiros - pmdb politician and president of the senate of brazil djavan - singer/songwriter deodoro da fonseca ( 1827-1892 ) - first president of brazil , 1889-1891 . anilda leão ( 1923-2012 ) poet , writer , feminist , actress and singer marta - women 's football striker nise da silveira - psychiatrist hermeto pascoal - composer and multi-instrumentalist floriano peixoto - second president of brazil graciliano ramos - writer bruna tenório - top model mário zagallo - football player and manager jorge de lima - poet and writer roberto firmino - liverpool fc football player . flag . the coat of arms symbolizes the first alagoan settlement of porto calvo . some plantations , sugarcane , and cotton that provided wealth in the past are incorporated in the design . the colors red , white , and blue refer to the flag of france , symbolizing the ideals of the french revolution ( liberté , égalité , fraternité ) , while the five-pointed star refers to the coat of arms of brazil . references . external links . official website brazilian tourism portal visit alagoas guide of alagoas ministry of transport port data including main products exported brazilian embassy in london : são francisco river