Gukurahundi

background . before the rhodesian bush war , the main black nationalist organisation in southern rhodesia , the zimbabwe african people 's union ( zapu ) , split into two groups in 1963 , the split-away group being the zimbabwe african national union ( zanu ) . '' zimbabwe african national union , '' microsoft encarta online encyclopedia 2008 , accessed 30 june 2008 . archived 31 october 2009 . though these groups had a common origin they gradually grew apart , with the split away group , zanu , recruiting mainly from the shona regions , while zapu recruited mainly from ndebele-speaking regions in the west . '' breaking the silence , building true peace . a report on the disturbances in matabeleland and the midlands 1980–1989 '' there is a much earlier source for shona hostility to the ndebele , going back to the arrival in 1837 of mzilikazi and his matabele followers . mzilikazi carved out a territory for himself by fighting and dispossessing the local shona . tribes & kingdoms , js bergh & ap bergh , 1984 the armies of these two groups , zapu 's zimbabwe people 's revolutionary army ( zipra ) , and zanu 's zimbabwe african national liberation army ( zanla ) , developed rivalries for the support of the people and would fight each other . when rhodesia became zimbabwe in 1980 , following the lancaster house agreement , the two armies so distrusted each other that it was difficult to integrate them both into the national army . these problems were only in matabeleland . for example : former zipra elements attacked civilian areas in zvishavane , kadoma and bulawayo . it seemed zipra had a hidden arms cache . there were major outbreaks of violence carried out by zipra against the civilian population . the first of these was in november 1980 , followed by a more serious incident in early 1981 . this led to the defection of many zipra members . zapu was supporting a new dissident war to improve its position in zimbabwe . in the elections held in april 1980 , zanu received 57 out of 100 seats and robert mugabe became prime minister . a historian dr stuart doran of events in zimbabwe , using historical documents , has written a short article 'new documents claim to prove mugabe ordered gukurahundi killings ' way back in 1983 . quoted in part : the documents point to internal killings neither provoked nor sustained by outsiders , suggesting that the atrocities were driven from the top by zanu-pf in pursuit of specific political objectives . viewed across a period of several years , the documents appear to provide evidence that the massacres were but one component of a sustained and strategic effort to remove all political opposition within five years of independence . zanu-pf leaders were determined to secure a '' victory '' against a non-existent opposition in elections scheduled for 1985 , after which there would be a '' mandate '' from the people to impose a one-party state . . entumbane uprisings . in november 1980 enos nkala made remarks at a rally in bulawayo , in which he warned zapu that zanu would deliver a few blows against them . this preceded the 1980 entumbane clashes in entumbane , during which zipra and the zimbabwe national army fought a pitched battle for two days . in february 1981 there was a second uprising , which spread to glenville and also to connemara in the midlands . zipra troops in other parts of matabeleland headed for bulawayo to join the battle , and the zimbabwean national army units had to come in to stop the fighting . the government asked justice enoch dumbutshena , the former chief justice of zimbabwe , to hold an inquiry into the uprising – zipra was found to be preparing for war . many zipra cadres defected after entumbane , fearing retribution . 1982 . this situation became worse after the finding of arms caches in february 1982 . zanu now openly accused zapu of plotting another war and zapu leaders were arrested or removed from cabinet . however , the treason trial in 1982 involving dumiso dabengwa , lookout masuku and four others failed to prove a case against them . all were released although dabengwa and masuku were re-detained without trial for four years . as a result , ex-zipra cadres deserted the army after this . they did this out of necessity to stay alive . with their leaders all locked up or in exile , they felt there was nobody to protect them within the army . '' we were threatened , that was why i decided to desert , '' said one dissident . the army integration scheme saw former zipra recruits being harassed and accused of sympathising with their deserted colleagues . they were no longer trusted and were being constantly harassed . however , joshua nkomo publicly disowned the deserted soldiers and thus discouraged any others from leaving the army . meanwhile , south africa 's policy of destabilising zimbabwe by military means , while blaming zapu for the actions of south african agents , continued and escalate the breakdown between zapu and zanu . . fifth brigade . robert mugabe , then prime minister , had signed an agreement with north korean president kim il sung in october 1980 to have the north korean military train a brigade for the zimbabwean army . this was soon after mugabe had announced the need for a militia to '' combat malcontents . '' mugabe replied by saying dissidents should '' watch out , '' announcing the brigade would be called '' gukurahundi . '' this brigade was named the fifth brigade . the members of the fifth brigade were drawn from 3500 ex-zanla troops at tongogara assembly point , named after josiah tongogara , the zanla general . there were a few zipra ( zapu ) troops in the unit for a start , but they were withdrawn before the end of the training . the training of 5th brigade lasted until september 1982 , when minister sekeramayi announced training was complete . the first commander of the fifth brigade was colonel perrance shiri . the fifth brigade was different from all other zimbabwean army units in that it was directly subordinated to the prime minister office , and not integrated to the normal army command structures . their codes , uniforms , radios and equipment were not compatible with other army units . their most distinguishing feature in the field was their red berets . . conflict and killings . in january 1983 , a crackdown by the elite fifth brigade in matabeleland north was initiated to purge the dissidents , and its participation lasted until late 1984 . the brigade 's directives apparently specified a search for local zapu officials and veterans of zapu 's armed wing , the zimbabwe people 's revolutionary army ( zipra ) . seizure or detention by the fifth brigade was arbitrary . in bulawayo , for instance , ndebele men of fighting age were considered potential dissidents and therefore , guilty of subversive activities . most detained were summarily executed or marched to re-education camps . most of the dead were shot in public executions , often after being forced to dig their own graves in front of family and fellow villagers . on occasion the fifth brigade also massacred large groups of ndebele , seemingly at random & mdash ; the largest such incident occurred in march 1983 , when 62 young men and women were shot on the banks of the cewale river , lupane . seven survived with gunshot wounds , the other 55 died . another way 5 brigade used to kill large groups of people was to burn them alive in huts . they did this in tsholotsho and also in lupane . they would routinely round up dozens , or even hundreds , of civilians and march them at gun point to a central place , like a school or bore-hole . there they would be forced to sing shona songs praising zanu , at the same time being beaten with sticks . these gatherings usually ended with public executions . those killed could be ex-zipras , zapu officials , or anybody chosen at random . the zimbabwe government repudiated these allegations and accused the hostile foreign press of fabricating stories . zimbabwean minister for national security sydney sekeramayi countered that allegations of atrocities were part of a zapu disinformation programme to discredit the army . the government characterised such allegations as irresponsible , contrived propaganda because it failed to give proper weight to the violence by dissidents , collier 's yearbook , 1982 , 1983 , new york : macmillan who targeted zanu officials . it is estimated that 700–800 people were murdered by dissident gangs in rural regions . in august 1985 , dissidents massacred 22 shona civilians in mwenezi . on a mission farm in matobo , dissidents massacred 16 people . e.p makambe , marginalising the human rights campaign : the dissident factor and the politics of violence in zimbabwe , 1980–1987 , institute of southern african studies , national university of lesotho . death estimates . the catholic commission for justice and peace in zimbabwe documented at least 2,000 deaths , and speculated that the actual number could be 8,000 or higher . local ndebele put the figure between 20,000 and 40,000 . journalist heidi holland referred to a death toll of 8,000 as a typical conservative estimate . in february 1983 the international red cross disclosed that 1,200 ndebele had been murdered that month alone . in a unanimously adopted resolution in 2005 , the international association of genocide scholars estimated the death toll at 20,000 . . reactions . in 1992 serving defence minister moven mahachi became the first zanu official who publicly apologised for the execution and torture of civilians by the fifth brigade . five years later , enos nkala , former defence minister , described his involvement with gukurahundi as '' eternal hell '' and blamed president mugabe for having orchestrated it . speaking at joshua nkomo 's memorial service on 2 july 2000 , mugabe admitted that '' thousands '' had been killed during the campaign , calling it a '' moment of madness '' . . unity accord of 1987 . robert mugabe and zapu leader joshua nkomo signed the unity accord on 22 december 1987 . '' landmarks in robert mugabe 's life '' the independent this effectively merged zapu and zanu into the zimbabwe african national union – patriotic front ( zanu–pf ) . on 18 april 1988 , mugabe announced an amnesty for all dissidents , and nkomo called on them to lay down their arms . a general ordinance was issued saying all those who surrendered before 31 may would get a full pardon . this was extended not just to dissidents but to criminals of various types serving jail terms . over the next few weeks , 122 dissidents surrendered . in june , the amnesty was extended to include all members of the security forces who had committed human rights violations . in the 1990s , the disturbances were finally at an end . this brought relief nationwide , but in parts of the country it left behind many problems that remain unsolved . these include poor health , poverty , practical and legal problems and a deep-rooted suspicion of government officials . with the emergence of a 'new dispensation ' under emmerson mnangagwa , there was a general expectation that for the first time the government would publicly apologize for the atrocities . however , like his predecessor , mnangagwa has not done anything that can be accepted by the victims as bringing closure . this comes after mnangagwa set up a seven-member commission of inquiry in early 2019 chaired by former south african president kgalema motlanthe which critics like the mthwakazi republic party ( mrp ) argue , will not solve the underlying problems . there is general discontent and people from the affected communities do not believe that the government is sincere in its commitments towards the gukurahundi genocide issue . a helpful guide will be zenzele ndebele 's documentary which can be viewed through the following link . references . some of the material here is drawn from a report compiled by the legal resources foundation ( lrf ) and the catholic commission for justice and peace in zimbabwe ( ccjp ) entitled breaking the silence , building true peace . a report on the disturbances in matabeleland and the midlands 1980–1989 . notes . . bibliography . mukiwa : a white boy in africa , part three , peter godwin , picador , martin rupiah lecturer , '' demobilisation and integration : 'operation merger ' and the zimbabwe national defence forces , 1980–1987 '' , african security review , vol 4 , no 3 , 1995 . film . documentary film : finding mercy ( director : robyn paterson , 2012 ) includes interviews with zimbabwean civilians and refugees about gukurahundi and the policy of mugabe . literature . zimbabwean author christopher mlalazi has written a novel on the gukurahundi killings from a child 's perspective , running with mother ( 2012 ) . external links . '' breaking the silence , building true peace . a report on the disturbances in matabeleland and the midlands 1980–1989 '' independence : twenty years on cry zimbabwe tells how robert mugabe and his zanu-pf came to political power after british and commonwealth supervised elections in 1980 . fifth brigade gukurahundi atrocities youtube ian smith 's comments during gukurahundi youtube matabeleland testimonies – 1983 youtube