Battle of Neresheim

background . on 8 june 1796 , the army of rhin-et-moselle commanded by jean victor marie moreau numbered 71,581 foot soldiers and 6,515 cavalry , not counting artillerists . the army was formed into a right wing under pierre marie barthélemy ferino , a center led by louis desaix and a left wing directed by laurent gouvion saint-cyr . ferino 's three divisions were led by françois antoine louis bourcier , 9,281 infantry and 690 cavalry , henri françois delaborde , 8,300 infantry and 174 cavalry and augustin tuncq , 7,437 infantry and 432 cavalry . desaix 's three divisions were commanded by michel de beaupuy , 14,565 infantry and 1,266 cavalry , antoine guillaume delmas , 7,898 infantry and 865 cavalry , and charles antoine xaintrailles , 4,828 infantry and 962 cavalry . saint-cyr 's two divisions were under guillaume philibert duhesme , 7,438 infantry and 895 cavalry , and alexandre camille taponier , 11,823 infantry and 1,231 cavalry . smith ( 1998 ) , p . 111 with artillerymen , moreau 's host counted a total of 79,592 soldiers . originally , the army of rhin-et-moselle was opposed by 82,776 austrians and allies under dagobert sigmund von wurmser . phipps ( 2010 ) , p . 274 but 25,330 austrians were soon transferred to italy and wurmser went with this force on 18 june . maximilian anton karl , count baillet de latour was appointed the new commander of the army of the upper rhine . the former leader of the army of the lower rhine , archduke charles , duke of teschen was replaced by wilhelm von wartensleben so he could take overall command of both austrian armies . on 24 june 1796 , the army of rhin-et-moselle mounted a successful assault crossing of the rhine river in the battle of kehl . the french sustained losses of 150 killed , wounded and missing out of 10,065 engaged . the swabian circle defenders numbered 7,000 soldiers in eight foot battalions , eight horse squadrons and two artillery batteries . the swabians suffered over 700 casualties and lost 14 guns and 22 munition wagons . moreau 's forces inflicted a second defeat on a force of 9,000 swabians and their austrian allies under anton sztáray at renchen on 28 june . this time the french reported only 200 casualties while inflicting 550 killed and wounded on their enemies . in addition , the french captured 850 soldiers , seven guns and two munition wagons . smith ( 1998 ) , pp . 115-116 during this period of maneuvering , moreau switched the positions of two of his wings . ferino still commanded the right wing , but desaix now commanded the left wing while saint-cyr led the center . on 30 june , latour 's army of the upper rhine was divided into a left wing under michael von fröhlich , a center led by karl aloys zu fürstenberg and a right wing that latour personally controlled . fröhlich 's wing was made up of eight battalions and 12 squadrons of austrians organized in two brigades . fürstenberg 's command consisted of 17 battalions , five companies and 10 squadrons , including swabians and bavarians , organized into five brigades . latour 's wing had 25 battalions and 58 squadrons organized into five divisions under prince von fürstemberg , johann mészáros von szoboszló , johann sigismund riesch , karl von riese , and sztáray . there were an additional six battalions and six squadrons holding mannheim and one battalion garrisoning philippsburg . archduke charles was approaching with an austrian division under friedrich freiherr von hotze and a saxon division under general von lindt . hotze directed 16 battalions and 20 squadrons in three brigades while lindt commanded nine battalions and 19 squadrons in five brigades . with desaix on the left and saint-cyr on the right , moreau pressed north up the east bank of the rhine to the murg river . the french thrust severed austrians under fröhlich and french royalists under louis joseph , prince of condé from the remainder of latour 's army . dodge ( 2011 ) , p . 288 ferino 's wing pursued fröhlich and condé to the southeast and seized the region around freiburg im breisgau . on the murg , desaix won a minor victory over latour in the battle of rastatt . by this time , archduke charles arrived from the north with 20,000 reinforcements . the archduke planned to attack on 10 july , but moreau preempted him by one day . in the battle of ettlingen on the 9th , both commanders tried to hold with their left wings and attack with their right . on moreau 's right , saint-cyr was successful in driving back konrad valentin von kaim 's austrians near frauenalb while taponier 's division pushed back lindt 's saxons near neuenbürg . on the french left , desaix captured malsch twice but was ultimately driven out . despite having won the battle on his right flank , charles feared saint-cyr 's advance might cut him off from his supply base at heilbronn so the archduke ordered a retreat to the east . dodge ( 2011 ) , p . 290 archduke charles stopped long enough at pforzheim to transfer his military stores to the army 's wagon train . moreau was surprised by his foe 's decision to disengage and took several days to digest this information . the french commander planned to attack pforzheim on 15 july , but by that date charles was retreating farther to the east . phipps ( 2011 ) , p . 294 on 21 july , there was a skirmish at cannstatt near stuttgart . there were 8,000 austrians in nine battalions and eight squadrons involved in the clash . smith ( 1998 ) , p . 117 from cannstatt , charles retreated toward schwäbisch gmünd with moreau following his enemies at a leisurely pace . meanwhile , the isolated austrian left wing withdrew through villingen with ferino in pursuit . the swabians and bavarian began negotiations with the french to quit the war while the saxons marched away to the north to join wartensleben 's army . when charles left the banks of the rhine he left behind 30,000 troops in garrisons at mannheim , philippsburg , mainz , königstein im taunus and ehrenbreitstein fortress . dodge ( 2011 ) , p . 292 on 29 july at biberach an der riss , the swabian regional contingent was disarmed by fröhlich on the instructions of charles . these subtractions left charles with only three-quarters of the strength of moreau . on 2 august , moreau 's troops bumped into the austrians at geislingen an der steige and for a week afterward there was constant skirmishing with charles ' rear guard . saint-cyr occupied the city of ulm on 8 august 1796 . two days later , charles was joined by his left wing . phipps ( 2011 ) , p . 317 at this time ferino was at memmingen to the south of the danube . . battle . on 13 july in desaix 's left wing , the division of delmas consisted of the 50th and 97th line and 16th light infantry demi-brigades and four squadrons each of the 7th hussar and 10th and 17th dragoon regiments . delmas ' brigade commanders were jean marie rodolph eickemayer , who had been recruited from mainz , and maurice frimont . the division of beaupuy was made up of the 10th , 62nd and 103rd line and the 10th light demi-brigades , 4th and 8th chasseurs à cheval and the 6th dragoons . beaupuy 's brigadiers were gilles joseph martin brunteau saint-suzanne and dominique joba . bourcier 's reserve division comprised the 93rd and 109th line , the 1st and 2nd carabiniers and the 2nd , 3rd , 9th , 14th and 15th cavalry regiments . all demi-brigades had three battalions , all cavalry regiments had three squadrons , while the carabiniers , chasseurs , dragoons and hussars had four squadrons . this source placed the 93rd and 109th line in the reserve rather than in the center . a report from 7 august 1796 showed that saint-cyr shuffled the brigades in the center so that duhesme 's division had only one while taponier had the other three . in duhesme 's division , dominique vandamme 's brigade was made up of the 17th and 100th line infantry demi-brigades , two squadrons of the 20th chasseurs à cheval and a detachment of the 11th hussars , a total of 5,272 infantry and 292 cavalry . taponier 's division included the brigades of antoine laroche dubouscat , claude lecourbe and henri françois lambert . laroche directed 5,124 soldiers of the 21st light and 31st line infantry , lecourbe commanded 5,878 men of the 84th and 106th line and lambert controlled 5,888 troops of the 93rd and 109th line . two squadrons of 240 sabers from the 2nd chasseurs à cheval were attached to lecourbe 's brigade . altogether , there were 22,162 foot soldiers , 532 horsemen and 433 gunners in saint-cyr 's command . in addition to the other units , the 9th hussars were normally attached to taponier 's division . archduke charles wished to prevent the army of moreau from joining with his colleague jean-baptiste jourdan and the army of sambre-et-meuse . the austrian commander hoped to withdraw to the south bank of the danube but the army of rhin-et-moselle was following too closely . by attacking moreau , the archduke hoped to push the french back in order to prevent their two armies from merging and to give his own troops enough room to cross the danube safely . also , he wanted to lure moreau into crossing the danube and separating himself from jourdan . moreau 's army was extended across a front wide . charles drew up plans to attack on 11 august . he sent one column to cross to the north bank of the danube at günzburg to get behind the french right flank . his troops were ready to move at midnight , but heavy rains slowed several of his assault columns . on the 10th saint-cyr with taponier 's division , drove the austrians in his front out of the village of eglingen . urged on by moreau , saint-cyr balked because he believed that the enemy were in strength nearby . before anything more could be done , the heavy rain began and made it impossible to fire the cannons on both sides . moreau refused to let his subordinate withdraw to a more defensible position or to order duhesme 's division to move closer . the only concession moreau would make was to send up one regiment of carabiniers to patrol in front of taponier . to be on the safe side , saint-cyr stationed lecourbe and one demi brigade at dischingen where there was a bridge over the egau river . meanwhile , duhesme stayed well to the south at medlingen in the danube valley . phipps ( 2011 ) , pp . 319-320 the austrian archduke commanded 43,000 men while moreau led 44,737 troops . charles massed his main strength against saint-cyr , who commanded 30,426 soldiers if the nearby reserve was included . on the right flank , johann i joseph , prince of liechtenstein led the advance guard while sztáray led the reserve . they would operate against bopfingen and seize the neresheim-nördlingen road . charles personally led 5,000 infantry and 1,500 cavalry on dunstelkingen in the center . to charles ' immediate right , hotze directed 7,500 foot and 1,800 horse toward kösingen and schweindorf . to charles ' immediate left , latour 's 5,500 troops would clear eglingen and dischingen . on the left flank , fröhlich was in charge of the force that would cross the danube behind the french right flank . he would cooperate with riese 's troops . the outnumbered duhesme was to be assailed by 7,000 infantry and 2,400 cavalry . phipps ( 2011 ) , p . 323 once they crushed the french right flank , 3,000 men under karl mercandin were to attack dischingen while the rest were supposed to circle behind moreau 's army and keep it from escaping . the sudden austrian advance at dawn caused the 150-strong regiment of carabiniers to retreat at the gallop . saint-cyr 's light cavalry , led by étienne marie antoine champion de nansouty , lost heart at seeing the heavy cavalry fleeing and fell back , leaving the french infantry at eglingen without support . the austrian horse fell on the flank of lambert 's brigade , routing its six battalions . this left taponier 's division with 12 battalions to face charles ' assault . at this moment moreau arrived at saint-cyr 's headquarters . before riding off to consult with desaix , the french army commander placed bourcier 's division in support nearby and agreed to have the left wing attack the austrian right flank . saint-cyr deployed nine battalions at dunstelkingen while keeping lecourbe 's three battalions to protect his right rear at dischingen . at 9:00 am the austrians attacked this position but were beaten back . their artillery set dunstelkingen on fire but this actually helped prevent the austrians from advancing . moreau then returned from his meeting with desaix to inform saint-cyr that the left wing 's attack would be delayed until delmas ' division could be recalled from the extreme left . phipps ( 2011 ) , p . 321 . this source stated that laroche 's brigade was routed but twice afterward said that it was lambert 's troops that ran away . hotze seized kösingen but found himself facing a new french line on high ground between him and neresheim . he attacked this position but was repulsed by desaix . on hotze 's right , honoré théodore maxime gazan drove the austrians back to schweindorf . the austrians took bopfingen but found that the french were moving south to assist the center . the clash at bopfingen was fought by the duke albert carabinier regiment nr . 5 and the siebenburger hussar regiment nr . 47 . smith ( 1998 ) , p . 120 desaix had little trouble fending off these advances . but a message came from the far right that said duhesme 's division was in trouble . phipps ( 2011 ) , p . 322 riese attacked duhesme at medlingen , forcing him to retreat . a large force of austrian cavalry reached giengen to block the french retreat , but duhesme escaped to the northwest . mercandin ended the day short of dischingen and riese moved west to heidenheim an der brenz rather than making a sweep into the french rear . fröhlich 's column only got as far as albeck , north of ulm . duhesme 's division lost some cannons and was not able to rejoin saint-cyr for three days . the center 's artillery park at heidenheim hurriedly displaced north to aalen . this left saint-cyr 's troops with no reserve artillery ammunition and dependent on supply from bourcier 's small artillery park . moreau appeared a third time at saint-cyr 's headquarters promising that desaix would soon attack the austrian right flank . though saint-cyr was in a tight spot , in fact , charles became anxious about moreau 's commitment of the french reserve . the austrians declined to launch any more serious assaults on taponier 's division and by 1:00 pm the contest degenerated into an artillery duel . part of lambert 's brigade was rallied and reoccupied heidenheim . the austrians threatening the french right flank began withdrawing to dillingen an der donau . for the fourth time that day moreau came to see saint-cyr , this time accompanied by desaix . they informed their colleague that delmas ' division was not available yet and it was too late to attack the austrian right that day . everything would be ready the next day . charles hoped that moreau might concede defeat , but the morning of 12 august found the french army still in position . charles then gave the order to fall back . worried about the artillery ammunition shortage , moreau did not attack charles ' right , but neither did he panic and retreat . instead he held his position all day on the 12th waiting for confirmation that the austrians were withdrawing across the danube . phipps ( 2011 ) , p . 324 besides the two cavalry regiments that fought at bopfingen , the austrian units that came into action were four battalions of infantry regiments reisky nr . 13 and slavonier grenz , three battalions each of infantry regiments manfredini nr . 12 , nádasdy nr . 39 and kinsky nr . 47 , two battalions of infantry regiment schröder nr . 7 , one battalion each of infantry regiments archduke charles nr . 3 , alton nr . 15 and ligne nr . 30 , the apfaltrern , candiani , pietsch and retz grenadier battalions , elements of archduke ferdinand hussar regiment nr . 32 and four squadrons of the archduke franz cuirassier regiment nr . 29 . . results . according to one source that called the battle a french victory , the austrians lost 1,100 killed and wounded plus 500 captured while the french suffered 1,200 killed and wounded plus 1,200 captured . another authority characterized the action as a '' drawn battle '' and stated that casualties numbered 3,000 on each side . the austrian retreat was not molested by the french , which was one of the reasons why charles fought the battle . the austrian army crossed the danube at dillingen and donauwörth , destroying all the bridges behind them . furious with duhesme for retreating , moreau removed him from command of his division . saint-cyr persuaded him to rescind the order a few days later . moreau deserved criticism for spreading his forces too widely but he can be credited for keeping his composure despite the defeat of duhesme . but moreau now fell into a fatal strategic error . charles entertained a desire to combine forces with wartensleben at the earliest opportunity in order to defeat jourdan 's army . when charles withdrew to the south bank of the danube , he left moreau free to stay on the north bank and join with jourdan . charles hoped to lure his opponent onto the south bank which would take moreau farther away from jourdan . in fact , moreau did not begin to advance until 14 august and then he headed for the danube crossings . meanwhile , charles retreated rapidly , increasing the distance between his army and moreau , but also giving himself more room to maneuver . on 18 and 19 august moreau 's army finally crossed to the south bank of the danube . but on the 17th the archduke made a crucial strategic move . leaving latour with 30,288 troops plus condé 's 5,000-6,000 men , charles and 28,000 troops recrossed to the north bank , heading for a rendezvous with wartensleben . ignoring this move , moreau moved steadily to the east on the south bank of the danube . phipps ( 2011 ) , pp . 325-326 napoleon later wrote of moreau , '' one would have said that he was ignorant that a french army existed on his left '' . dodge ( 2011 ) , p . 296 the next actions were the battle of amberg and the battle of friedberg , both on 24 august 1796 . smith ( 1998 ) , p . 121 . notes . references . . see also . pope , stephen . the cassell dictionary of the napoleonic wars , cassell ( 1999 )