Isotope analysis

tissue affected . isotopic oxygen is incorporated into the body primarily through ingestion at which point it is used in the formation of , for archaeological purposes , bones and teeth . the oxygen is incorporated into the hydroxylcarbonic apatite of bone and tooth enamel . bone is continually remodelled throughout the lifetime of an individual . although the rate of turnover of isotopic oxygen in hydroxyapatite is not fully known , it is assumed to be similar to that of collagen ; approximately 10 years . consequently , should an individual remain in a region for 10 years or longer , the isotopic oxygen ratios in the bone hydroxyapatite would reflect the oxygen ratios present in that region . teeth are not subject to continual remodelling and so their isotopic oxygen ratios remain constant from the time of formation . the isotopic oxygen ratios , then , of teeth represent the ratios of the region in which the individual was born and raised . where deciduous teeth are present , it is also possible to determine the age at which a child was weaned . breast milk production draws upon the body water of the mother , which has higher levels of 18 o due to the preferential loss of 16 o through sweat , urine , and expired water vapour . while teeth are more resistant to chemical and physical changes over time , both are subject to post-depositional diagenesis . as such , isotopic analysis makes use of the more resistant phosphate groups , rather than the less abundant hydroxyl group or the more likely diagenetic carbonate groups present . applications . isotope analysis has widespread applicability in the natural sciences . these include numerous applications in the biological , earth and environmental sciences . archaeology . . reconstructing ancient diets . archaeological materials , such as bone , organic residues , hair , or sea shells , can serve as substrates for isotopic analysis . carbon , nitrogen and zinc isotope ratios are used to investigate the diets of past people ; these isotopic systems can be used with others , such as strontium or oxygen , to answer questions about population movements and cultural interactions , such as trade . carbon isotopes are analysed in archaeology to determine the source of carbon at the base of the foodchain . examining the carbon 12/carbon 13 isotope ratio , it is possible to determine whether animals and humans ate predominantly c3 or c4 plants . potential c3 food sources include wheat , rice , tubers , fruits , nuts and many vegetables , while c4 food sources include millet and sugar cane . carbon isotope ratios can also be used to distinguish between marine , freshwater , and terrestrial food sources . carbon isotope ratios can be measured in bone collagen or bone mineral ( hydroxylapatite ) , and each of these fractions of bone can be analysed to shed light on different components of diet . the carbon in bone collagen is predominantly sourced from dietary protein , while the carbon found in bone mineral is sourced from all consumed dietary carbon , included carbohydrates , lipids , and protein . to obtain an accurate picture of palaeodiets , it is important to understand processes of diagenesis that may affect the original isotopic signal . it is also important for the researcher to know the variations of isotopes within individuals , between individuals , and over time . . sourcing archaeological materials . isotope analysis has been particularly useful in archaeology as a means of characterization . characterization of artifacts involves determining the isotopic composition of possible source materials such as metal ore bodies and comparing these data to the isotopic composition of analyzed artifacts . a wide range of archaeological materials such as metals , glass and lead-based pigments have been sourced using isotopic characterization . particularly in the bronze age mediterranean , lead isotope analysis has been a useful tool for determining the sources of metals and an important indicator of trade patterns . interpretation of lead isotope data is , however , often contentious and faces numerous instrumental and methodological challenges . problems such as the mixing and re-using of metals from different sources , limited reliable data and contamination of samples can be difficult problems in interpretation . ecology . all biologically active elements exist in a number of different isotopic forms , of which two or more are stable . for example , most carbon is present as 12 c , with approximately 1 % being 13 c . the ratio of the two isotopes may be altered by biological and geophysical processes , and these differences can be utilized in a number of ways by ecologists . the main elements used in isotope ecology are carbon , nitrogen , oxygen , hydrogen and sulfur , but also include silicon , iron , and strontium . . stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems . stable isotopes have become a popular method for understanding aquatic ecosystems because they can help scientists in understanding source links and process information in marine food webs . these analyses can also be used to a certain degree in terrestrial systems . certain isotopes can signify distinct primary producers forming the bases of food webs and trophic level positioning . the stable isotope compositions are expressed in terms of delta values ( δ ) in permil ( ‰ ) , i.e . parts per thousand differences from a standard . they express the proportion of an isotope that is in a sample . the values are expressed as : : δx ( r sample / r standard ) – 1 & times ; 10 3 where x represents the isotope of interest ( e.g . , 13 c ) and r represents the ratio of the isotope of interest and its natural form ( e.g . , 13 c/ 12 c ) . higher ( or less negative ) delta values indicate increases in a sample 's isotope of interest , relative to the standard , and lower ( or more negative ) values indicate decreases . the standard reference materials for carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur are δ13c limestone , nitrogen gas in the atmosphere , and cañon diablo meteorite respectively . analysis is usually done using a mass spectrometer , detecting small differences between gaseous elements . analysis of a sample can cost anywhere from 30 to 100 . stable isotopes assist scientists in analyzing animal diets and food webs by examining the animal tissues that bear a fixed isotopic enrichment or depletion vs . the diet . muscle or protein fractions have become the most common animal tissue used to examine the isotopes because they represent the assimilated nutrients in their diet . the main advantage to using stable isotope analysis as opposed to stomach content observations is that no matter what the status is of the animal 's stomach ( empty or not ) , the isotope tracers in the tissues will give us an understanding of its trophic position and food source . the three major isotopes used in aquatic ecosystem food web analysis are 13 c , 15 n and 34 s . while all three indicate information on trophic dynamics , it is common to perform analysis on at least two of the previously mentioned 3 isotopes for better understanding of marine trophic interactions and for stronger results . carbon-13 . carbon isotopes aid us in determining the primary production source responsible for the energy flow in an ecosystem . the transfer of 13 c through trophic levels remains relatively the same , except for a small increase ( an enrichment 13 c between animals indicate that they have different food sources or that their food webs are based on different primary producers ( i.e . different species of phytoplankton , marsh grasses . ) because δ 13 c indicates the original source of primary producers , the isotopes can also help us determine shifts in diets , both short term , long term or permanent . these shifts may even correlate to seasonal changes , reflecting phytoplankton abundance . scientists have found that there can be wide ranges of δ 13 c values in phytoplankton populations over a geographic region . while it is not quite certain as to why this may be , there are several hypotheses for this occurrence . these include isotopes within dissolved inorganic carbon pools ( dic ) may vary with temperature and location and that growth rates of phytoplankton may affect their uptake of the isotopes . δ 13 c has been used in determining migration of juvenile animals from sheltered inshore areas to offshore locations by examining the changes in their diets . a study by fry ( 1983 ) studied the isotopic compositions in juvenile shrimp of south texas grass flats . fry found that at the beginning of the study the shrimp had isotopic values of δ 13 c -11 to -14‰ and 6-8‰ for δ 15 n and δ 34 s . as the shrimp matured and migrated offshore , the isotopic values changed to those resembling offshore organisms ( δ 13 c -15‰ and δ 15 n 11.5‰ and δ 34 s 16‰ ) . . sulfur-34 . while there is no enrichment of 34 s between trophic levels , the stable isotope can be useful in distinguishing benthos vs . pelagic producers and marsh vs . phytoplankton producers . similar to 13 c , it can also help distinguish between different phytoplankton as the key primary producers in food webs . the differences between seawater sulfates and sulfides ( c . 21‰ vs -10‰ ) aid scientists in the discriminations . sulfur tends to be more plentiful in less aerobic areas , such as benthic systems and marsh plants , than the pelagic and more aerobic systems . thus , in the benthic systems , there are smaller δ34s values . . nitrogen-15 . nitrogen isotopes indicate the trophic level position of organisms ( reflective of the time the tissue samples were taken ) . there is a larger enrichment component with δ 15 n because its retention is higher than that of 14 n . this can be seen by analyzing the waste of organisms . cattle urine has shown that there is a depletion of 15 n relative to the diet . as organisms eat each other , the 15 n isotopes are transferred to the predators . thus , organisms higher in the trophic pyramid have accumulated higher levels of 15 n ( and higher δ 15 n values ) relative to their prey and others before them in the food web . numerous studies on marine ecosystems have shown that on average there is a 3.2‰ enrichment of 15 n vs . diet between different trophic level species in ecosystems . in the baltic sea , hansson et al . ( 1997 ) found that when analyzing a variety of creatures ( such as particulate organic matter ( phytoplankton ) , zooplankton , mysids , sprat , smelt and herring , ) there was an apparent fractionation of 2.4‰ between consumers and their apparent prey . in addition to trophic positioning of organisms , δ 15 n values have become commonly used in distinguishing between land derived and natural sources of nutrients . as water travels from septic tanks to aquifers , the nitrogen rich water is delivered into coastal areas . waste-water nitrate has higher concentrations of 15 n than the nitrate that is found in natural soils in near shore zones . for bacteria , it is more convenient for them to uptake 14 n as opposed to 15 n because it is a lighter element and easier to metabolize . thus , due to bacteria 's preference when performing biogeochemical cycle such as denitrification and volatilization of ammonia , 14 n is removed from the water at a faster rate than 15 n , resulting in more 15 n entering the aquifer . 15 n is roughly 10-20‰ as opposed to the natural 15 n values of 2-8‰ . the inorganic nitrogen that is emitted from septic tanks and other human-derived sewage is usually in the form of nh4+ . once the nitrogen enters the estuaries via groundwater , it is thought that because there is more 15 n entering , that there will also be more 15 n in the inorganic nitrogen pool delivered and that it is picked up more by producers taking up n . even though 14 n is easier to take up , because there is much more 15 n , there will still be higher amounts assimilated than normal . these levels of δ 15 n can be examined in creatures that live in the area and are non migratory ( such as macrophytes , clams and even some fish ) . this method of identifying high levels of nitrogen input is becoming a more and more popular method in attempting to monitor nutrient input into estuaries and coastal ecosystems . environmental managers have become more and more concerned about measuring anthropogenic nutrient inputs into estuaries because excess in nutrients can lead to eutrophication and hypoxic events , eliminating organisms from an area entirely . . oxygen-18 . analysis of the ratio of 18 o to 16 o in the shells of the colorado delta clam was used to assess the historical extent of the estuary in the colorado river delta prior to construction of upstream dams . . hydrogen-2 . the ratio of 2 h , also known as deuterium , to 1 h has been studied in both plant and animal tissue . hydrogen isotopes in plant tissue are correlated with local water values but vary based on fractionation during photosynthesis , transpiration , and other processes in the formation of cellulose . a study on the isotope ratios of tissues from plants growing within a small area in texas found tissues from cam plants were enriched in deuterium relative to c4 plants . hydrogen isotope ratios in animal tissue reflect diet , including drinking water , and have been used to study bird migration and aquatic food webs . . forensic science . a recent development in forensic science is the isotopic analysis of hair strands . hair has a recognisable growth rate of 9-11mm per month or 15 & nbsp ; cm per year . human hair growth is primarily a function of diet , especially drinking water intake . the stable isotopic ratios of drinking water are a function of location , and the geology that the water percolates through . 87 sr , 88 sr and oxygen isotope variations are different all over the world . these differences in isotopic ratio are then biologically 'set ' in our hair as it grows and it has therefore become possible to identify recent geographic histories by the analysis of hair strands . for example , it could be possible to identify whether a terrorist suspect had recently been to a particular location from hair analysis . this hair analysis is a non-invasive method which is becoming very popular in cases that dna or other traditional means are bringing no answers . isotope analysis can be used by forensic investigators to determine whether two or more samples of explosives are of a common origin . most high explosives contain carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen and oxygen atoms and thus comparing their relative abundances of isotopes can reveal the existence of a common origin . researchers have also shown that analysis of the 12 c/ 13 c ratios can locate the country of origin for a given explosive . stable isotopic analysis has also been used in the identification of drug trafficking routes . isotopic abundances are different in morphine grown from poppies in south-east asia versus poppies grown in south-west asia . the same is applied to cocaine that is derived from bolivia and that from colombia . . traceability . stable isotopic analysis has also been used for tracing the geographical origin of food and timber . . geology . . hydrology . in isotope hydrology , stable isotopes of water ( 2 h and 18 o ) are used to estimate the source , age , and flow paths of water flowing through ecosystems . the main effects that change the stable isotope composition of water are evaporation and condensation . variability in water isotopes is used to study sources of water to streams and rivers , evaporation rates , groundwater recharge , and other hydrological processes . . paleoclimatology . the ratio of 18 o to 16 o in ice and deep sea cores is temperature dependent , and can be used as a proxy measure for reconstructing climate change . during colder periods of the earth 's history ( glacials ) such as during the ice ages , 16 o is preferentially evaporated from the colder oceans , leaving the slightly heavier and more sluggish 18 o behind . organisms such as foraminifera which combine oxygen dissolved in the surrounding water with carbon and calcium to build their shells therefore incorporate the temperature-dependent 18 o to 16 o ratio . when these organisms die , they settle out on the sea bed , preserving a long and invaluable record of global climate change through much of the quaternary . similarly , ice cores on land are enriched in the heavier 18 o relative to 16 o during warmer climatic phases ( interglacials ) as more energy is available for the evaporation of the heavier 18 o isotope . the oxygen isotope record preserved in the ice cores is therefore a '' mirror '' of the record contained in ocean sediments . oxygen isotopes preserve a record of the effects of the milankovitch cycles on climate change during the quaternary , revealing an approximately 100,000-year cyclicity in the earth 's climate .