Jean Buridan

life . education and career . image : aristotelis de anima.jpg thumb right 14th-century manuscript of buridan 's questions on aristotle 's de anima . buridan was born sometime before 1301 , perhaps at or near the town of béthune in picardy , france , zupko 2015 , §1 or perhaps elsewhere in the diocese of arras . he received his education in paris , first at the collège du cardinal lemoine and then at the university of paris , receiving his master of arts degree and formal license to teach at the latter by the mid-1320s . unusually , he spent his entire academic life in the faculty of arts , rather than obtaining the doctorate in law , medicine or theology that typically prepared the way for a career in philosophy . also unusual for a philosopher of his time , buridan further maintained his intellectual independence by remaining a secular clergy , rather than joining a religious order . a papal letter of 1330 refers to him as simply , '' clericus atrebatensis diocoesis , magister in artibus a cleric from the diocese of arras and master of arts . '' faral 1951 , p . 11 as university statutes permitted only those educated in theology to teach or write on the subject , there are no writings from buridan on either theological matters or commentary of peter lombard 's sentences . speculation on his reasons for avoiding religious matters have remained uncertain . zupko 2004 , ch . 10 courtenay 2002 courtenay 2005 most scholars think it is unlikely that he went unnoticed , given his philosophical talents . as well , it is unlikely that he could not afford to study theology , given that he received several bursaries and stipends . indeed , he is listed in a document from 1350 as being among the teachers capable of supporting themselves without the need for financial assistance from the university . zupko has speculated that buridan '' deliberately chose to remain among the 'artists artistae ' , '' possibly envisioning philosophy as a secular enterprise based on what is evident to both the senses and the intellect , rather than the non-evident truths of theology revealed through scripture and doctrine . the last appearance of buridan in historical documents came in 1359 , where he was mentioned as the adjudicator in a territorial dispute between the england and picard nations . it is supposed that he died sometime after then , since one of his benefices was awarded to another person in 1362 . michael 1986 , pp . 79–238 399–404 the bishop albert of saxony , himself renowned as a logician , was among the most notable of his students . an ordinance of louis xi of france in 1473 , directed against the nominalism , prohibited the reading of his works . apocryphal stories . apocryphal stories abound about his reputed amorous affairs and adventures which are enough to show that he enjoyed a reputation as a glamorous and mysterious figure in paris life . faral 1951 , p . 16 none of the stories can be confirmed , and most contradict known historical information . faral 1951 , p . 9-33 some rumors hold that he died when the king of france had him put in a sack and thrown into the river seine after his affair with the queen came to light . françois villon alludes to this in his famous poem ballade des dames du temps jadis . others suggest that he was expelled from paris due to his nominalist teachings and moved to vienna to found the university of vienna . another story talks of him hitting pope clement vi with a shoe . . impetus theory . the concept of inertia was alien to the physics of aristotle . aristotle , and his peripatetic followers held that a body was maintained in motion only by the action of a continuous external force . thus , in the aristotelian view , a projectile moving through the air would owe its continuing motion to eddies or vibrations in the surrounding medium , a phenomenon known as antiperistasis . in the absence of a proximate force , the body would come to rest almost immediately . the theory of impetus proposed that motion was maintained by some property of the body , imparted when it was set in motion . buridan was the first to name this motion-maintaining property impetus but the theory itself probably did not originate with him . a less sophisticated notion of impressed forced can be found in the avicenna 's doctrine of mayl ( inclination ) . in this he was possibly influenced by john philoponus who was developing the stoic notion of hormé ( impulse ) . zupko 1997 the major difference between buridan 's theory and that of his predecessor is that he rejected the view that the impetus dissipated spontaneously , instead asserting that a body would be arrested by the forces of air resistance and gravity which might be opposing its impetus . buridan further held that the impetus of a body increased with the speed with which it was set in motion , and with its quantity of matter . this is closely related to the modern concept of momentum . buridan saw impetus as causing the motion of the object : : . after leaving the arm of the thrower , the projectile would be moved by an impetus given to it by the thrower and would continue to be moved as long as the impetus remained stronger than the resistance , and would be of infinite duration were it not diminished and corrupted by a contrary force resisting it or by something inclining it to a contrary motion ( questions on aristotle 's metaphysics xii.9 : 73ra ) . t . f . glick , s . j . livesay , f . wallis , medieval science , technology and medicine : an encyclopedia , 2005 , p . 107 . buridan also contended that impetus is a variable quality whose force is determined by the speed and quantity of the matter in the subject . in this way , the acceleration of a falling body could be understood in terms of its gradual accumulation of units of impetus . . legacy . because of his developments , historians of science pierre duhem and anneliese maier both saw buridan as playing an important role in the demise of on the heavens . duhem even called buridan the forerunner of galileo . duhem 1906–13 zupko has disagreed , pointing out that buridan did not use his theory to transform the science of mechanics , but instead remained a committed aristotelian in thinking that motion and rest are contrary states and that the universe is finite in extent . . selected works in english translation . hughes , g . e . ( 1983 ) . john buridan on self-reference : chapter eight of buridan 's sophismata . an edition and translation with an introduction , and philosophical commentary . cambridge/london/new york : cambridge university press , . king , peter ( 1986 ) . john buridan 's logic : the treatise on supposition ; the treatise on consequences . translation from the latin with a philosophical introduction , dordrecht : reidel . zupko , john alexander , ed . and tr . ( 1990 ) . john buridan 's philosophy of mind : an edition and translation of book iii of his questions on aristotle 's de anima ( third redaction ) , with commentary and critical and interpretative essays . doctoral dissertation , cornell university . klima , gyula , tr . ( 2002 ) . john buridan : 'summulae de dialectica ' . yale library of medieval philosophy . new haven , conn./london : yale university press . john buridan ( 2015 ) . treatise on consequences , translated , with an introduction by stephen read . new york : fordham university press . see also . list of roman catholic scientist-clerics buridan formula . references . notes . . sources . . further reading . klima , gyula ( 2009 ) . john buridan . new york : oxford university press . thijssen , j . m . m . h . , and jack zupko ( ed . ) ( 2002 ) . the metaphysics and natural philosophy of john buridan leiden : brill . external links . bibliography by fabienne pironet ( up to 2001 ) buridan 's logic and metaphysics : an annotated bibliography ( updates the bibliography of fabienne pironet to 2014 ) buridan 's logical works . i . an overview of the summulae de dialectica a detailed summary of the nine treatises of the summulae de dialectica buridan 's logical works . ii . the treatise on consequences and other writings a summary of the other logical writings buridan : editions , translations and studies on the manuscript tradition complete bibliography of the logical and metaphysical works