Zhuang Zhou

life . the only account of the life of zhuangzi is a brief sketch in chapter 63 of sima qian 's records of the grand historian , and most of the information it contains seems to have simply been drawn from anecdotes in the zhuangzi itself . in sima 's biography , he is described as a minor official from the town of meng ( in modern anhui ) in the state of song , living in the time of king hui of wei and king xuan of qi ( late 4th century bc ) . sima qian writes : : :chuang-tze had made himself well acquainted with all the literature of his time , but preferred the views of laozi ; and ranked himself among his followers , so that of the more than ten myriads of characters contained in his published writings the greater part are occupied with metaphorical illustrations of lao 's doctrines . he made '' the old fisherman , '' '' the robber chih , '' and '' the cutting open satchels , '' to satirize and expose the disciples of confucius , and clearly exhibit the sentiments of lao . such names and characters as '' wei-lei hsu '' and '' khang-sang tze '' are fictitious , and the pieces where they occur are not to be understood as narratives of real events . : :but chuang was an admirable writer and skillful composer , and by his instances and truthful descriptions hit and exposed the mohism and literati . the ablest scholars of his day could not escape his satire nor reply to it , while he allowed and enjoyed himself with his sparkling , dashing style ; and thus it was that the greatest men , even kings and princes , could not use him for their purposes . : :king wei of chu , having heard of the ability of chuang chau , sent messengers with large gifts to bring him to his court , and promising also that he would make him his chief minister . chuang-tze , however , only laughed and said to them , '' a thousand ounces of silver are a great gain to me ; and to be a high noble and minister is a most honorable position . but have you not seen the victim-ox for the border sacrifice ? it is carefully fed for several years , and robed with rich embroidery that it may be fit to enter the grand temple . when the time comes for it to do so , it would prefer to be a little pig , but it can not get to be so . go away quickly , and do not soil me with your presence . i had rather amuse and enjoy myself in the midst of a filthy ditch than be subject to the rules and restrictions in the court of a sovereign . i have determined never to take office , but prefer the enjoyment of my own free will . '' the validity of his existence has been questioned by russell kirkland , who writes : according to modern understandings of chinese tradition , the text known as the chuang-tzu was the production of a 'taoist ' thinker of ancient china named chuang chou/zhuang zhou . in reality , it was nothing of the sort . the chuang-tzu known to us today was the production of a thinker of the third century ce named kuo hsiang . though kuo was long called merely a 'commentator , ' he was in reality much more : he arranged the texts and compiled the present 33-chapter edition . regarding the identity of the original person named chuang chou/zhuangzi , there is no reliable historical data at all . however , sima qian 's biography of zhuangzi pre-dates guo xiang ( kuo hsiang ) by centuries . furthermore , the han shu '' yiwenzhi '' ( monograph on literature ) lists a text zhuangzi , showing that a text with this title existed no later than the early 1st century ad , again pre-dating guo xiang by centuries . writings . zhuangzi is traditionally credited as the author of at least part of the work bearing his name , the zhuangzi . this work , in its current shape consisting of 33 chapters , is traditionally divided into three parts : the first , known as the '' inner chapters '' , consists of the first seven chapters ; the second , known as the '' outer chapters '' , consist of the next 15 chapters ; the last , known as the '' mixed chapters '' , consist of the remaining 11 chapters . the meaning of these three names is disputed : according to guo xiang , the '' inner chapters '' were written by zhuangzi , the '' outer chapters '' written by his disciples , and the '' mixed chapters '' by other hands ; the other interpretation is that the names refer to the origin of the titles of the chapters—the '' inner chapters '' take their titles from phrases inside the chapter , the '' outer chapters '' from the opening words of the chapters , and the '' mixed chapters '' from a mixture of these two sources . further study of the text does not provide a clear choice between these alternatives . on the one side , as martin palmer points out in the introduction to his translation , two of the three chapters sima qian cited in his biography of zhuangzi , come from the '' outer chapters '' and the third from the '' mixed chapters '' . '' neither of these are allowed as authentic chuang tzu chapters by certain purists , yet they breathe the very spirit of chuang tzu just as much as , for example , the famous 'butterfly passage ' of chapter 2 . '' on the other hand , chapter 33 has been often considered as intrusive , being a survey of the major movements during the '' hundred schools of thought '' with an emphasis on the philosophy of hui shi . further , a.c . graham and other critics have subjected the text to a stylistic analysis and identified four strains of thought in the book : a ) the ideas of zhuangzi or his disciples ; b ) a '' primitivist '' strain of thinking similar to laozi in chapters 8-10 and the first half of chapter 11 ; c ) a strain very strongly represented in chapters 28-31 which is attributed to the philosophy of yang chu ; and d ) a fourth strain which may be related to the philosophical school of huang-lao . in this spirit , martin palmer wrote that '' trying to read chuang tzu sequentially is a mistake . the text is a collection , not a developing argument . '' zhuangzi was renowned for his brilliant wordplay and use of parables to convey messages . his critiques of confucian society and historical figures are humorous and at times ironic . influence . zhuangzi has influenced thinking far beyond east asia . the german philosopher martin buber translated his texts in 1910 . in 1930 , martin heidegger asked for buber 's translation of zhuangzi after his bremen speech '' on the essence of truth '' . in order to explain his own philosophy , heidegger read from chapter 17 , where zhuangzi says to the thinker hui shih : the historian of ideas dag herbjørnsrud concludes : '' it may therefore be difficult to say where the philosophies of lao tzu and zhuangzi end and where the most influential german thinking of the twentieth century starts . '' in the beginning ( 08:59 ) of the film the matrix ( 1999 ) , the lead character neo asks his visitors whether they had the feeling where they were not sure if they are awake or dreaming . this is a reference to zhuangzi 's '' butterfly dream '' : '' now i do not know whether i was then a man dreaming i was a butterfly , or whether i am now a butterfly , dreaming i am a man . '' . biological evolution . in a passage in his writings , zhuangzi described the transmutation of species . shen , tsing song . ( 2015 ) . evolutionism through chinese eyes : yan fu , ma junwu and their translations of darwinian evolutionism . asianetwork exchange : a journal for asian studies in the liberal arts . 22 ( 1 ) : 49–60 . in the complete works of chuang tzu , translated by burton watson it is stated that : the seeds of things have mysterious workings . in the water they become break vine , on the edges of the water they become frog 's robe . if they sprout on the slopes they become hill slippers . if hill slippers get rich soil , they turn into crow 's feet . the roots of crow 's feet turn into maggots and their leaves turn into butterflies . before long the butterflies are transformed and turn into insects that live under the stove ; they look like snakes and their name is ch ' u-t ' o . after a thousand days , the ch ' u-t ' o insects become birds called dried leftover bones . the saliva of the dried leftover bones becomes ssu-mi bugs and the ssu-mi bugs become vinegar eaters . i-lo bugs are born from the vinegar eaters , and huang-shuang bugs from chiu-yu bugs . chiu-yu bugs are born from mou-jui bugs and mou-jui bugs are born from rot grubs and rot grubs are born from sheep 's groom . sheep 's groom couples with bamboo that has not sprouted for a long while and produces green peace plants . green peace plants produce leopards and leopards produce horses and horses produce men . men in time return again to the mysterious workings . so all creatures come out of the mysterious workings and go back into them again . watson , burton . ( 1968 ) . the complete works of chuang tzu . new york : columbia university press . pp . 195-196 . the 20th century chinese philosopher and essayist hu shih considered zhuangzi a history of evolutionary thought . . see also . dream argument goblet word liezi tao te ching . notes . citations . references . ames , roger t . ( 1991 ) , 'the mencian concept of ren xing : does it mean human nature ? ' in chinese texts and philosophical contexts , ed . henry rosemont , jr . lasalle , ill . : open court press . ames , roger t . ( 1998 ) ed . wandering at ease in the zhuangzi . albany : state university of new york press . bruya , brian ( translator ) . ( 2019 ) . zhuangzi : the way of nature . princeton : princeton university press . hansen , chad ( 2003 ) . '' the relatively happy fish , '' asian philosophy 13:145-164 . herbjørnsrud , dag ( 2018 ) . '' a sea for fish on dry land , '' the blog of the journal of history of ideas . ( google books ) merton , thomas . ( 1969 ) . the way of chuang tzu . new york : new directions . waltham , clae ( editor ) . ( 1971 ) . chuang tzu : genius of the absurd . new york : ace books . . external links . zhuangzi bilingual chinese-english version ( james legge 's translation ) - chinese text project the zhuangzi '' being boundless '' , complete translation of zhuangzi by nina correa chuang tzu at taoism.net , chuang tzu 's stories and teachings - translations by derek lin zhuangzi , the internet encyclopedia of philosophy zhuangzi , stanford encyclopedia of philosophy selection from the zhuangzi , translated by patricia ebrey chuang-tzu at taopage.org zhuang zi , chapter 1 zhuang zi , chapter 2 james legge complete translation in english the legge translation of the complete chuang tzu ( zhuangzi ) updated