Johann Reuchlin

early life . johann reuchlin was born at pforzheim in the black forest in 1455 , where his father was an official of the dominican monastery . according to the fashion of the time , his name was graecized by his italian friends into capnion ( καπνίον ) , a nickname which reuchlin used as a sort of transparent mask when he introduced himself as an interlocutor in the de verbo mirifico . he remained fond of his home town ; he constantly calls himself phorcensis , and in the de verbo he ascribes to pforzheim his inclination towards literature . here he began his latin studies in the monastery school , and , though in 1470 he was for a short time at freiburg , that university seems to have taught him little . reuchlin 's career as a scholar appears to have turned almost on an accident ; his fine voice gained him a place in the household of charles i , margrave of baden , and soon , having some reputation as a latinist , he was chosen to accompany frederick , the third son of the prince , to the university of paris . frederick was some years his junior , and was destined for an ecclesiastical career . this new connection did not last long , but it determined the course of reuchlin 's life . he now began to learn greek , which had been taught in the french capital since 1470 , and he also attached himself to the leader of the paris realists , jean heynlin ( d . 1496 ) , a worthy and learned man , whom he followed to the vigorous young university of basel in 1474 . . teaching and writing career . image : widmung-reuchlins.jpg thumb left johann reuchlin 's coat of arms at basel reuchlin took his master 's degree ( 1477 ) , and began to lecture with success , teaching a more classical latin than was then common in german schools , and explaining aristotle in greek . his studies in this language had been continued at basel under andronicus contoblacas , and here he formed the acquaintance of the bookseller , johann amerbach , for whom he prepared a latin lexicon ( vocabularius breviloquus , 1st ed , 1475–76 ) , which ran through many editions . this first publication , and reuchlin 's account of his teaching at basel in a letter to cardinal adrian ( adriano castellesi ) in february 1518 , show that he had already found his life 's work . he was a born teacher , and this work was not to be done mainly from the professor 's chair . reuchlin soon left basel to seek further greek training with george hermonymus at paris , and to learn to write a fair greek hand that he might support himself by copying manuscripts . and now he felt that he must choose a profession . his choice fell on law , and he was thus led to the great school of orléans ( 1478 ) , and finally to poitiers , where he became licentiate in july 1481 . from poitiers reuchlin went in december 1481 to tübingen with the intention of becoming a teacher in the local university , but his friends recommended him to count eberhard of württemberg , who was about to journey to italy and required an interpreter . reuchlin was selected for this post , and in february 1482 left stuttgart for florence and rome . the journey lasted but a few months , but it brought the german scholar into contact with several learned italians , especially at the medicean academy in florence ; his connection with the count became permanent , and after his return to stuttgart he received important posts at eberhard 's court . about this time he appears to have married , but little is known of his married life . he left no children ; but in later years his sister 's grandson philipp melanchthon was like a son to him till the reformation estranged them . in 1490 he was again in italy . here he saw pico della mirandola , to whose kabbalah doctrines he afterwards became heir , and made a friend of the pope 's secretary , jakob questenberg , which was of service to him in his later troubles . again in 1492 he was employed on an embassy to the emperor frederick at linz , and here he began to read hebrew with the emperor 's jewish physician jakob ben jehiel loans . loans 's instruction laid the basis of that thorough knowledge which reuchlin afterwards improved on his third visit to rome in 1498 by the instruction of obadja sforno of cesena . in 1494 his rising reputation had been greatly enhanced by the publication of de verbo mirifico . in 1496 duke eberhard i of württemberg died , and enemies of reuchlin had the ear of his successor , duke heinrich of württemberg ( formerly heinrich count of württemberg-mömpelgard ) . he was glad , therefore , hastily to follow the invitation of johann von dalberg ( 1445–1503 ) , the scholarly bishop of worms , and flee to heidelberg , which was then the seat of the rhenish society in this court of letters reuchlin 's appointed function was to make translations from the greek authors , in which his reading was already extremely wide . though reuchlin had no public office as teacher , he was for much of his life the real centre of all greek and hebrew teaching in germany . to carry out this work he provided a series of aids for beginners and others . he never published a greek grammar , but he had one in manuscript for use with his pupils , and also published several little elementary greek books . reuchlin , it may be noted , pronounced greek as his native teachers had taught him to do , i.e . , in the modern greek fashion . this pronunciation , which he defends in de recta latini graecique sermonis pronuntiatione ( 1528 ) , came to be known , in contrast to that used by desiderius erasmus , as the reuchlinian . at heidelberg reuchlin had many private pupils , among whom franz von sickingen is the best known name . with the monks he had never been liked ; at stuttgart also his great enemy was the augustinian conrad holzinger . on this man he took a scholar 's revenge in his first latin comedy sergius , a satire on worthless monks and false relics . through dalberg , reuchlin came into contact with philip , count palatine of the rhine , who employed him to direct the studies of his sons , and in 1498 gave him the mission to rome which has been already noticed as fruitful for reuchlin 's progress in hebrew . he came back laden with hebrew books , and found when he reached heidelberg that a change of government had opened the way for his return to stuttgart , where his wife had remained all along . his friends had now again the upper hand , and knew reuchlin 's value . in 1500 , or perhaps in 1502 , he was given a very high judicial office in the swabian league , which he held till 1512 , when he retired to a small estate near stuttgart . hebrew studies and advocacy . for many years reuchlin had been increasingly absorbed in hebrew studies , which had for him more than a mere philology interest . he was interested in the reform of preaching as shown in his de arte predicandi ( 1503 ) —a book which became a sort of preacher 's manual ; but above all as a scholar he was eager that the bible should be better known , and could not tie himself to the authority of the vulgate . the key to the hebraea veritas was the grammatical and exegetical tradition of the medieval rabbis , especially of david kimhi , and when he had mastered this himself he was resolved to open it to others . in 1506 appeared his epoch-making de rudimentis hebraicis—grammar and lexicon—mainly after kimhi , yet not a mere copy of one man 's teaching . the edition was costly and sold slowly . one great difficulty was that the wars of maximilian i in italy prevented hebrew bibles coming into germany . but for this also reuchlin found help by printing the penitential psalms with grammatical explanations ( 1512 ) , and other helps followed from time to time . but his greek studies had interested him in those fantastical and mystical systems of later times with which the kabbala has no small affinity . following pico , he seemed to find in the kabbala a profound theosophy which might be of the greatest service for the defence of christianity and the reconciliation of science with the mysteries of faith , a common notion at that time . reuchlin 's mystico-cabbalistic ideas and objects were expounded in the de verbo mirifico , and finally in the de arte cabbalistica ( 1517 ) . many of his contemporaries thought that the first step to the conversion of the jews was to take away their books . this view was advocated by johannes pfefferkorn , a german catholic theologian . pfefferkorn , himself converted from judaism , actively preached against the jews and attempted to destroy copies of the talmud , and engaged in what became a long running pamphleteering battle with reuchlin . he wrote that '' the causes which hinder the jews from becoming christians are three : first , usury ; second , because they are not compelled to attend christian churches to hear the sermons ; and third , because they honor the talmud . '' . reuchlin , pfefferkorn , and the talmud in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in the babylonian talmud . the history of the talmud translated by michael l . rodkinson . book 10 vol . i chapter xiv ( 1918 ) p.76 pfefferkorn 's plans were backed by the dominicans of cologne ; and in 1509 he obtained the emperor 's authority to confiscate all jewish books directed against the christian faith . armed with this mandate , he visited stuttgart and asked reuchlin 's help as a jurist and expert in putting it into execution . reuchlin evaded the demand , mainly because the mandate lacked certain formalities , but he could no long remain neutral . the execution of pfefferkorn 's schemes led to difficulties and to a new appeal to maximilian . in 1510 reuchlin was appointed by emperor maximilian to a commission which was convened to review the matter . his answer is dated from stuttgart , 6 october 1510 ; in it he divides the books into six classes — apart from the bible which no one proposed to destroy — and , going through each class , he shows that the books openly insulting to christianity are very few and viewed as worthless by most jews themselves , while the others are either works necessary to the jewish worship , which was licensed by papal as well as imperial law , or contain matter of value and scholarly interest which ought not to be sacrificed because they are connected with another faith than that of the christians . he proposed that the emperor should decree that for ten years there should be two hebrew chairs at every german university , for which the jews should furnish books . maximilian 's other experts proposed that all books should be taken from the jews ; and , as the emperor still hesitated , his opponents threw on reuchlin the whole blame of their ill success . pfefferkorn circulated at the frankfurt fair of 1511 a gross libel ( handspiegel wider und gegen die juden ) declaring that reuchlin had been bribed . reuchlin defended himself in a pamphlet titled augenspiegel ( 1511 ) , which the theologians at the university of cologne attempted to suppress . on 7 october 1512 they , along with the inquisitor jacob van hoogstraaten , obtained an imperial order confiscating the augenspiegel . in 1513 reuchlin was summoned before a court of the inquisition . he was willing to receive corrections in theology , which was not his subject , but he could not unsay what he had said ; and as his enemies tried to press him into a corner he met them with open defiance in a defensio contra calumniatores ( 1513 ) . the universities were now appealed to for opinions , and were all against reuchlin . even paris ( august 1514 ) condemned the augenspiegel , and called on reuchlin to recant . meantime a formal process had begun at mainz before the grand inquisitor . but reuchlin managed to have the jurisdiction changed to the episcopal court of speyer . the reuchlin affair caused a wide rift in the church and eventually the case came before the papal court in rome . judgment was not finally given till july 1516 ; and then , though the decision was really for reuchlin , the trial was simply quashed . the result had cost reuchlin years of trouble and no small part of his modest fortune , but it was worth the sacrifice . for far above the direct importance of the issue was the great stirring of public opinion which had gone forward . and while the obscurantists escaped easily at rome , with only a half condemnation , they received a crushing blow in germany . in reuchlin 's defense , virorum epistolæ clarorum ad reuchlinum phorcensem ( letters of famous men to reuchlin of pforzheim ) , had been published . it was closely followed by epistolæ obscurorum virorum ( letters of obscure men ) , a satirical collection purporting to defend his accusers , but actually directed against them . no party could survive the ridicule that was poured on reuchlin 's opponents by this document . ulrich von hutten and franz von sickingen did all they could to force reuchlin 's enemies to a restitution of his material damages ; they even threatened a feud against the dominicans of cologne and spires . in 1520 , a commission met in frankfurt to investigate the case . it condemned hoogstraaten . but the final decision of rome did not indemnify reuchlin . the contest ended , however ; public interest had grown cold , absorbed entirely by the lutheran question , and reuchlin had no reason to fear new attacks . when , in 1517 , he received the theses propounded by luther , he exclaimed , '' thanks be to god , at last they have found a man who will give them so much to do that they will be compelled to let my old age end in peace . '' heinrich graetz and francis yates contended the defense of reuchlin , the epistolae obscurorum virorum , prefiguring luther 's opening salvo of the reformation . that this affair helped spark the protestant reformation . . although suspected of a leaning toward protestantism , reuchlin never left the catholic church . in 1518 he was appointed professor of hebrew and greek at wittenberg , but instead sent his nephew melanchthon . . influence on luther . luther 's comment that justification by faith was the '' true cabala '' in his commentary on galatians latin : commentarium in epistolam s . pauli ad galatas : 2 by martin luther , google books , also english , though the word cabala is lost in translation : a commentary on saint paul 's epistle to the galatians has been explained as relating to reuchlin 's influence . philosophia symbolica : johann reuchlin and the kabbalah : catalogue of an exhibition in the bibliotheca philosophica hermetica commemorating johann reuchlin ( 1455-1522 ) cis van heertum , bibliotheca philosophica hermetica ( amsterdam , netherlands ) bibliotheca philosophica hermetica , 2005 while luther had consulted reuchlin as a hebrew expert and used de arte cabalistica as support for an argument , luther took objection to reuchlin 's comment in de rudimentis hebraicis that the hebrew letters for jesus name meant '' the hidden god , '' which luther found contrary to matthew , chapter 1:21 , which describes the meaning as being about '' he would save his people from their sins . '' martin luther 's understanding of god 's two kingdoms : a response to the challenge of skepticism . texts and studies in reformation and post-reformation william j . wright , richard muller - 2010 . end of life . reuchlin did not long enjoy his victory over his accusers in peace . in 1519 , stuttgart was visited by famine , civil war and pestilence . from november of this year to the spring of 1521 , the veteran statesman sought refuge in the university of ingolstadt where he received an appointment as professor from william of bavaria . he taught greek and hebrew there for a year . it was 41 years since at poitiers he had last spoken from a public chair ; but at 65 he retained his gift of teaching , and hundreds of scholars crowded round him . this gleam of autumn sunshine was again broken by the plague ; but now he was called to tübingen and again spent the winter of 1521–22 teaching in his own systematic way . but in the spring he found it necessary to visit the baths of liebenzell , and there contracted jaundice , of which he died , leaving in the history of the new learning a name only second to that of his younger contemporary erasmus . reuchlin died in stuttgart , and is buried at st . leonhard church . . . publications . de verbo mirifico ( the wonder-working word , 1494 ) de arte cabbalistica ( on the art of kabbalah , 1517 ) . notes . references . johannes reuchlin and the campaign to destroy jewish books , by david h . price , oxford university press , 2011 . external links . johannes reuchlin and the jewish book controversy