Fifth force

experimental approaches . a new fundamental force might be difficult to test . gravity , for example , is such a weak force that the gravitational interaction between two objects is only significant when one of them has a great mass . therefore , it takes very sensitive equipment to measure gravitational interactions between objects that are small compared to the earth . a new ( or '' fifth '' ) fundamental force might similarly be weak and therefore difficult to detect . nonetheless , in the late 1980s a fifth force , operating on municipal scales ( i.e . with a range of about 100 meters ) , was reported by researchers ( fischbach et al . ) who were reanalyzing results of loránd eötvös from earlier in the century . the force was believed to be linked with hypercharge . over a number of years , other experiments have failed to duplicate this result . – the leading group searching for a fifth force . there are at least three kinds of searches that can be undertaken , which depend on the kind of force being considered , and its range . equivalence principle . one way to search for a fifth force is with tests of the strong equivalence principle : this is one of the most powerful tests of einstein 's theory of gravity : general relativity . alternative theories of gravity , such as brans–dicke theory , have a fifth force – possibly with infinite range . this is because gravitational interactions , in theories other than general relativity , have degrees of freedom other than the '' metric '' , which dictates the curvature of space , and different kinds of degrees of freedom produce different effects . for example , a scalar field can not produce the bending of starlight . the fifth force would manifest itself in an effect on solar system orbits , called the nordtvedt effect . this is tested with lunar laser ranging experiment and very-long-baseline interferometry . extra dimensions . another kind of fifth force , which arises in kaluza–klein theory , where the universe has extra dimensions , or in supergravity or string theory is the yukawa force , which is transmitted by a light scalar field ( i.e . a scalar field with a long compton wavelength , which determines the range ) . this has prompted a lot of recent interest , as a theory of supersymmetric large extra dimensions – dimensions with size slightly less than a millimeter – has prompted an experimental effort to test gravity on these very small scales . this requires extremely sensitive experiments which search for a deviation from the inverse-square law of gravity over a range of distances . , which is set to test for a fifth force in space , where it is possible to achieve greater sensitivity . essentially , they are looking for signs that the yukawa interaction is kicking in at a certain length . australian researchers , attempting to measure the gravitational constant deep in a mine shaft , found a discrepancy between the predicted and measured value , with the measured value being two percent too small . they concluded that the results may be explained by a repulsive fifth force with a range from a few centimetres to a kilometre . similar experiments have been carried out on board a submarine , uss dolphin ( agss-555 ) , while deeply submerged . a further experiment measuring the gravitational constant in a deep borehole in the greenland ice sheet found discrepancies of a few percent , but it was not possible to eliminate a geological source for the observed signal . . earth 's mantle . another experiment uses the earth 's mantle as a giant particle detector , focusing on geoelectrons . . cepheid variables . jain et al . ( 2012 ) examined existing data on the rate of pulsation of over a thousand cepheid variable stars in 25 & nbsp ; galaxies . theory suggests that the rate of cepheid pulsation in galaxies screened from a hypothetical fifth force by neighbouring clusters , would follow a different pattern from cepheids that are not screened . they were unable to find any variation from einstein 's theory of gravity . other approaches . some experiments used a lake plus a tower that is high . a comprehensive review by ephraim fischbach and carrick talmadge suggested there is no compelling evidence for the fifth force , though scientists still search for it . the fischbach-talmadge article was written in 1992 , and since then , other evidence has come to light that may indicate a fifth force . the above experiments search for a fifth force that is , like gravity , independent of the composition of an object , so all objects experience the force in proportion to their masses . forces that depend on the composition of an object can be very sensitively tested by torsion balance experiments of a type invented by loránd eötvös . such forces may depend , for example , on the ratio of protons to neutrons in an atomic nucleus , nuclear spin , or the relative amount of different kinds of binding energy in a nucleus ( see the semi-empirical mass formula ) . searches have been done from very short ranges , to municipal scales , to the scale of the earth , the sun , and dark matter at the center of the galaxy . modified gravity . also known as non-local gravity . a few physicists think that einstein 's theory of gravity will have to be modified – not at small scales , but at large distances , or equivalently , at small accelerations . this would change the gravity force to a non-local force . they point out that dark matter and dark energy are unexplained by the standard model of particle physics and suggest that some modification of gravity is necessary , possibly arising from modified newtonian dynamics or the holographic principle . this is fundamentally different from conventional ideas of a fifth force , as it grows stronger relative to gravity at longer distances . most physicists , however , think that dark matter and dark energy are not ad hoc , but are supported by a large number of complementary experiments and described by a very simple model . possible evidence . in 2015 , attila krasznahorkay at atomki , the hungarian academy of sciences 's institute for nuclear research in debrecen , hungary , and his colleagues posited the existence of x17 particle ( 17 mev ) only 34 & nbsp ; times heavier than the electron . in an effort to find a dark photon , the hungarian team fired protons at thin targets of lithium-7 , which created unstable beryllium-8 nuclei that then decayed and spat out pairs of electrons and positrons . excess decays were observed at an opening angle of 140° between the e + and e − , and a combined energy of 17 & nbsp ; mev , which indicated that a small fraction of beryllium-8 will shed excess energy in the form of a new particle . jonathan feng et al . ( 2016 ) proposed that a protophobic ( i.e . '' proton-ignoring '' ) x-boson with a mass of 16.7 & nbsp ; mev with suppressed couplings to protons relative to neutrons and electrons and femtometer range could explain the data . the force may explain the g−2 muon anomaly and provide a dark matter candidate . several research experiments are underway to attempt to validate or refute these results . in november 2019 , krasznahorkay announced that he and his team at atomki had successfully observed the same anomalies in the decay of stable helium atoms as had been observed in beryllium-8 , strengthening the case for the x17 particle 's existence . this was reported through science journalism , focusing largely on the implications that the existence of the x17 particle and a corresponding fifth force would have in the search for dark matter . speaking to the independent , krasznahorkay said '' if the particle ’ s existence is confirmed , it means physicists will have to finally reassess the interactions of the existing four fundamental forces of particle physics and make space for a fifth . '' the atomki group had claimed to find various other new particles earlier in 2016 but abandoned these claims later , without an explanation of what caused the spurious signals . the group has also been accused of cherry-picking results that support new particles while discarding null results . . see also . references .