Planetshine

earthshine . earthshine is visible earthlight reflected from the moon 's night side . it is also known as the moon 's ashen glow or as '' the new moon with the old moon in her arm '' . e.g . in the scots ballad of sir patrick spens earthshine is most readily visible from a few nights before until a few nights after a new moon , during the ( waxing or waning ) crescent phase . when the lunar phase is new as viewed from earth , earth would appear nearly fully sunlit from the moon . sunlight is reflected from earth to the night side of the moon . the night side appears to glow faintly , and the entire disk of the moon is dimly illuminated . leonardo da vinci explained the phenomenon in the early 16th century when he realized that both earth and the moon reflect sunlight at the same time . light is reflected from earth to the moon and back to earth as earthshine . earthshine is used to help determine the current albedo of earth . the data are used to analyze global cloud cover , a climate factor . oceans reflect the least amount of light , roughly 10 % . land reflects 10–25 % of sunlight , and clouds reflect around 50 % . thus , the part of earth where it is daytime and from where the moon is visible determines how bright the earthshine on the moon appears at any given time . studies of earthshine can be used to show how the earth 's cloud cover varies over time . preliminary results show a 6.5 % dip in cloud cover between 1985 and 1997 and a corresponding increase between 1997 and 2003 . this has implications for climate research , especially with regards to global warming . all clouds contribute to an increased albedo , however some clouds have a net warming effect because they trap more heat than they reflect , while others have a net cooling effect because their increased albedo reflects more radiation than they trap heat . so while the earth 's albedo is measurably increasing , the uncertainty over the amount of heat trapped means the overall effect on global temperature remains unclear . . retroreflection . features on earth , the moon , and some other bodies have , to some extent , retroreflector properties . light striking them is backscattered , or diffuse reflection preferentially back in the direction from which it has come rather than in other directions . if the light comes from the sun , it is reflected preferentially back toward the sun and in nearby directions . for example , when its phase is full , the moon reflects light preferentially toward the sun and also earth , which is in almost the same direction . as viewed from earth , the full moon therefore opposition surge than it would if it scattered light uniformly in all directions . similarly , near new moon , sunlight that has been backscattered from earth toward the sun and also the moon , which is in almost the same direction , and then backscattered again from the moon toward earth appears much brighter , as viewed from earth , than it would without the retroreflective effects . the retroreflection is produced by spheres of transparent material on the reflecting surface . when it encounters a transparent sphere , light is preferentially heiligenschein in a path , within the sphere , which exits it in the direction from which it entered . on earth , the spheres are droplets of water in clouds . on the moon , large numbers of solid glassy spheres are found on the surface . they are thought to have been formed from drops of molten ejecta , produced by impact events , which cooled and solidified before falling back to the surface . ringshine . ringshine is when sunlight is reflected by a planet 's ring system onto the planet or onto the moons of the planet . this has been observed in many of the photos from the cassini orbiter . . search for terrestrial planets . scientists at nasa 's navigator program , which specializes in the detection of terrestrial planets , have backed the launch of a terrestrial planet finder ( tpf ) mission . tpf would detect light reflected by planets orbiting stars to investigate whether they could harbor life . it would use advanced telescope technologies to look for life-marks in the light reflected from the planets , including water , oxygen and methane . the european space agency has a similar mission , named darwin , under consideration . this will also study the light from planets to detect the signatures of life . unlike many traditional astronomical challenges , the most serious challenge for these missions is not gathering enough photons from the faint planet , but rather detecting a faint planet that is extremely close to a very bright star . for a terrestrial planet , the contrast ratio of planet to its host stars is approximately ~10 −6 -10 −7 in the thermal infrared or ~10 −9 -10 −10 in the optical/near infrared . for this reason , darwin and terrestrial planet finder-i will work in the thermal infrared . however , searching for terrestrial planets in the optical/near infrared has the advantage that the diffraction limit corresponds to a smaller angle for a given size telescope . therefore , nasa is also pursuing a terrestrial planet finder-c mission that will search for and study terrestrial planets using the optical ( and near infrared ) wavelengths . while terrestrial planet finder-c aims to study the light of extrasolar planets , darwin and terrestrial planet finder-i will search for thermal infrared light that is reradiated ( rather than scattered ) by the planet . in preparation for these missions , astronomers have performed detailed earthshine observations , since earthshine has the spectroscopic characteristics of light reflected by the earth . astronomers have paid particular attention to whether earthshine measurement can detect the red edge , a spectral feature that is due to plants . the detection of a similar spectral feature in light from an extrasolar planet would be particularly interesting , since it might be due to a light-harvesting organism . while the red edge is almost certainly the easiest way to directly detect life on earth via earthshine observations , it could be extremely difficult to interpret a similar feature due to life on another planet , since the wavelength of the spectral feature is not known in advance ( unlike most atomic or molecular spectral features ) . moon in earthshine . see also . andré-louis danjon ashen light danjon scale list of reflected light sources . references . ford , e . b . , turner , e.l . & seager , s . ( 2001 ) '' characterization of extrasolar terrestrial planets from diurnal photometric variability nature , volume 412 , issue 6850 , pp . 885–887 . link and preprint seager , s . , turner , e . l . , schafer , j . , & ford , e . b . ( 2005 ) '' vegetation 's red edge : a possible spectroscopic biosignature of extraterrestrial plants astrobiology , volume 5 , issue 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 372–390 . ( link and preprint ) rush - earthshine from album vapor trails ( remastered 2013 ) . music lee , lifeson . lyrics peart . external links . science nasa : earthshine nasa astronomy picture of the day , 19 april 2002 earthshine ' linked to solar cycle , climate change , space.com scientists watch dark side of the moon to monitor earth 's climate , american geophysical union earthshine picture gallery on skytrip.de