Spin network

definition . penrose 's original definition . a spin network , as described in penrose ( 1971 ) , r . penrose ( 1971a ) , '' angular momentum : an approach to combinatorial spacetime , '' in t . bastin ( ed . ) , quantum theory and beyond , cambridge university press ( this paper can be found online on john c . baez 's website ) ; and r . penrose ( 1971b ) , '' applications of negative dimensional tensors , '' in d . j . a . welsh ( ed . ) , combinatorial mathematics and its applications ( proc . conf . , oxford , 1969 ) , academic press , pp . 221–244 , esp . p . 241 ( the latter paper was presented in 1969 but published in 1971 according to roger penrose , '' on the origins of twistor theory '' in : gravitation and geometry , a volume in honour of i . robinson , biblipolis , naples 1987 ) . is a kind of diagram in which each line segment represents the world line of a '' unit '' ( either an elementary particle or a compound system of particles ) . three line segments join at each vertex . a vertex may be interpreted as an event in which either a single unit splits into two or two units collide and join into a single unit . diagrams whose line segments are all joined at vertices are called closed spin networks . time may be viewed as going in one direction , such as from the bottom to the top of the diagram , but for closed spin networks the direction of time is irrelevant to calculations . each line segment is labelled with an integer called a spin number . a unit with spin number n is called an n-unit and has angular momentum nħ/2 , where ħ is the reduced planck constant . for bosons , such as photons and gluons , n is an even number . for fermions , such as electrons and quarks , n is odd . given any closed spin network , a non-negative integer can be calculated which is called the norm of the spin network . norms can be used to calculate the probabilities of various spin values . a network whose norm is zero has zero probability of occurrence . the rules for calculating norms and probabilities are beyond the scope of this article . however , they imply that for a spin network to have nonzero norm , two requirements must be met at each vertex . suppose a vertex joins three units with spin numbers a , b , and c . then , these requirements are stated as : triangle inequality : a must be less than or equal to b + c , b less than or equal to a + c , and c less than or equal to a + b . fermion conservation : a + b + c must be an even number . for example , a 3 , b 4 , c 6 is impossible since 3 + 4 + 6 13 is odd , and a 3 , b 4 , c 9 is impossible since 9 > 3 + 4 . however , a 3 , b 4 , c 5 is possible since 3 + 4 + 5 12 is even , and the triangle inequality is satisfied . some conventions use labellings by half-integers , with the condition that the sum a + b + c must be a whole number . formal definition . more formally , a spin network is a ( directed ) graph whose edges are associated with irreducible representations of a compact lie group and whose vertices are associated with intertwiners of the edge representations adjacent to it . a spin network , immersed into a manifold , can be used to define a functional on the space of connections on this manifold . one computes holonomy of the connection along every link ( closed path ) of the graph , determines representation matrices corresponding to every link , multiplies all matrices and intertwiners together , and contracts indices in a prescribed way . a remarkable feature of the resulting functional is that it is invariant under local gauge transformations . usage in physics . in the context of loop quantum gravity . in loop quantum gravity ( lqg ) , a spin network represents a '' quantum state '' of the gravitational field on a 3-dimensional hypersurface . the set of all possible spin networks ( or , more accurately , '' s-knots '' that is , equivalence classes of spin networks under diffeomorphisms ) is countable ; it constitutes a basis of lqg hilbert space . one of the key results of loop quantum gravity is quantization of areas : the operator of the area a of a two-dimensional surface σ should have a discrete spectrum . every spin network is an eigenstate of each such operator , and the area eigenvalue equals : a_ where the sum goes over all intersections i of σ with the spin network . in this formula , pl is the planck length , \gamma is the immirzi parameter and j i 0 , 1/2 , 1 , 3/2 , . is the spin associated with the link i of the spin network . the two-dimensional area is therefore '' concentrated '' in the intersections with the spin network . according to this formula , the lowest possible non-zero eigenvalue of the area operator corresponds to a link that carries spin 1/2 representation . assuming an immirzi parameter on the order of 1 , this gives the smallest possible measurable area of ~10 −66 cm 2 . the formula for area eigenvalues becomes somewhat more complicated if the surface is allowed to pass through the vertices , as with anomalous diffusion models . also , the eigenvalues of the area operator a are constrained by ladder symmetry . similar quantization applies to the volume operator . the volume of a 3d submanifold that contains part of a spin network is given by a sum of contributions from each node inside it . one can think that every node in a spin network is an elementary '' quantum of volume '' and every link is a '' quantum of area '' surrounding this volume . more general gauge theories . similar constructions can be made for general gauge theories with a compact lie group g and a connection form . this is actually an exact duality over a lattice . over a manifold however , assumptions like diffeomorphism invariance are needed to make the duality exact ( smearing wilson loops is tricky ) . later , it was generalized by robert oeckl to representations of quantum groups in 2 and 3 dimensions using the tannaka–krein duality . michael a . levin and xiao-gang wen have also defined string-nets using tensor category that are objects very similar to spin networks . however the exact connection with spin networks is not clear yet . string-net condensation produces topological order states in condensed matter . usage in mathematics . in mathematics , spin networks have been used to study skein modules and character variety , which correspond to spaces of connections . see also . character variety penrose graphical notation spin foam string-net trace diagram . references . further reading . early papers . i . b . levinson , '' sum of wigner coefficients and their graphical representation , '' proceed . phys-tech inst . acad sci . lithuanian ssr 2 , 17-30 ( 1956 ) ( see the euclidean high temperature ( strong coupling ) section ) ( see the sections on abelian gauge theories ) . modern papers . xiao-gang wen , '' quantum field theory of many-body systems & ndash ; from the origin of sound to an origin of light and fermions , '' ( dubbed string-nets here . ) . books . g . e . stedman , diagram techniques in group theory , cambridge university press , 1990 . predrag cvitanović , group theory : birdtracks , lie 's , and exceptional groups , princeton university press , 2008 .