1975 in music

specific locations . 1975 in british music 1975 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1975 in country music 1975 in heavy metal music 1975 in jazz . events . january–april . january 2 – new york city u.s . district court judge richard owen rules that former beatle john lennon and his lawyers can have access to department of immigration files pertaining to his deportation case . january 5 – the wiz , a new musical version of the classic wizard of oz story , opens at broadway 's majestic theater in new york city . january 6 – approximately 1.000 led zeppelin fans , waiting for tickets to go on sale for led zeppelin 's february 4 concert , cause an estimated 30,000 in damage to the lobby of the boston garden . the fans reportedly broke chairs and doors and caused other damage to the building . boston mayor kevin white cancels the upcoming show . january 8 – three led zeppelin concerts at madison square garden sell out in a record four hours . january 12 – '' the warner brothers music show '' begins a nine-city , 18-show tour of europe . the tour included warner brothers acts little feat , tower of power , the doobie brothers , bonaroo , montrose , and graham central station . january 24 – jazz pianist keith jarrett plays the solo improvisation 'the köln concert ' at the cologne opera , which , recorded live , becomes the best-selling piano recording in history . february 13 – the film slade in flame , starring the members of slade , premieres at the metropole theatre in london . february 21 – john lennon releases his rock ' n ' roll lp , featuring his favorite rock songs from the 1950s . to promote the album he conducts a telephone interview with 20 rock radio stations simultaneously . march 1 – the 17th annual grammy awards are presented in new york , hosted by andy williams . stevie wonder 's fulfillingness ' first finale wins album of the year , olivia newton-john 's '' i honestly love you '' wins record of the year and barbra streisand 's '' the way we were '' wins song of the year . marvin hamlisch wins best new artist . march 2 – los angeles police make a routine traffic stop that turns out to be paul mccartney and his wife linda . linda is arrested for having 170 to 225 & nbsp ; grams ( six to eight ounces ) of marijuana in her pocketbook . march 21 – alice cooper , now a solo artist , begins the welcome to my nightmare tour in kalamazoo , michigan . the elaborate show is among the largest stage spectacles of the decade . march 22 – in the eurovision song contest in stockholm , sweden , the dutch group teach-in wins with the song '' ding-a-dong '' . march 23 – promoter bill graham stages the s.n.a.c.k . ( students need athletics , culture and kicks ) charity concert at kezar stadium in san francisco , to benefit the city 's educational system . almost 60,000 people come to see the grateful dead , the doobie brothers , santana , jefferson starship , tower of power , eddie palmieri , joan baez , graham central station and neil young joined by members of the band along with a surprise appearance by bob dylan . it 's the largest benefit concert in history to date . march 26 – the film version of the who 's tommy premieres in london . march 29 – jeff beck releases the album blow by blow . it is the first album to be released using just his name . april 3 – steve miller is arrested and charged with setting fire to the clothes and personal effects of a friend , benita diorio , and resisting arrest . diorio drops the charges the following day . april 7 – ritchie blackmore plays a final show with deep purple in paris before quitting to form his own group , rainbow . april 17 – cambodian singer-songwriter sinn sisamouth and his pregnant wife are among millions forced out of phnom penh by the khmer rouge . april 18 – alice cooper 's first television special , welcome to my nightmare : the making of a record album airs . april 24 – pete ham , founder of the group badfinger , is found hanged in his london garage . his death is ruled a suicide . april 28 – tom snyder interviews john lennon on the tomorrow show . may–august . may 1 – the rolling stones announce their forthcoming north american tour by performing brown sugar from a flatbed truck on fifth avenue in new york city . the occasion was guitarist ronnie wood 's debut with the band . may 10 – stevie wonder performs before 125,000 people at the washington monument as part of human kindness day festivities . june 1 – the rolling stones open their north american tour in baton rouge , louisiana . june 20 – talking heads perform their first show at cbgb in new york . june 23 – alice cooper falls off the stage during a concert in vancouver , canada , breaking six ribs . june 24 – '' gens du pays '' , the unofficial national anthem of quebec , is performed for the first time by gilles vigneault in a concert on montreal 's mount royal . june 30 – cher and gregg allman are married in a las vegas hotel suite . that same day , the jackson 5 leave motown for sony music , but the brothers are forced to change their name to the jacksons because motown owns the jackson 5 name . jermaine jackson stays with motown when his brothers break their contracts and leave for cbs ; he is replaced by youngest jackson brother randy as a result . july 4 – the texas senate declares the fourth of july '' willie nelson day '' , as more than 70,000 fans visit liberty hill for the third annual picnic and country rock show headlined by willie himself . august 4 – robert plant and his wife maureen are seriously injured in a car accident while vacationing on the greek island of rhodes . the immediate future of led zeppelin is cast into doubt , as plant will not recover for quite some time . august 9 the bee gees begin their mid-1970s international comeback when '' jive talkin ' '' reaches 1 and goes platinum with sales over 1 million . renato carosone 's comeback concert after a 15-year retirement . the first rock music awards , produced by don kirshner , are held in los angeles , co-hosted by elton john and diana ross . john wins '' outstanding rock personality of the year '' . the who 's film tommy wins '' rock movie of the year '' . august 23 – peter gabriel leaves british progressive rock group genesis . september–december . september 15 – pink floyd releases their ninth album , wish you were here . september 29 – singer jackie wilson suffers a massive heart attack while performing on stage in cherry hill , new jersey . he survives but never physically recovers . october 3 – the who release their seventh studio album , the who by numbers . october 7 – john lennon finally wins his battle to stay in the united states after the new york court of appeals overturns lennon 's 1972 deportation order . october 9 john lennon and yoko ono become parents of sean lennon at 2:00 am . the birth heralds the beginning of john 's temporary retirement from the music business as he vows to devote himself to family for the next five years . rock band kiss earns publicity by playing the homecoming dance of cadillac high school in cadillac , michigan . october 11 – bruce springsteen appears at the monmouth arts center ( count basie theater ) for the homecoming concert . october 18 – simon & garfunkel reunite on the second-ever episode of saturday night live on nbc , performing '' the boxer '' , '' scarborough fair '' , and new collaboration '' my little town '' . october 27 – bruce springsteen appears on the covers of both time and newsweek magazines on the same week . october 30 – bob dylan 's rolling thunder revue tour begins . november 6 – the sex pistols play their first concert at st . martin 's school of art in london . november 21 – queen 's '' bohemian rhapsody '' goes to number one in the u.k . , where it remains for five weeks of 1975 and four weeks of 1976 . december 6 – the who set the record for largest indoor concert at the pontiac silverdome , attended by 78,000 fans . december 10 – the john denver holiday special rocky mountain christmas airs on abc . december 18 – the official break-up of faces is announced at a london press conference . rod stewart will continue his solo career while ronnie wood is widely expected to be announced as an official member of the rolling stones in the near future . december 24 – the first issue of punk magazine is released with a january 1976 cover date . a drawing of lou reed is on the cover . december 25 – bassist steve harris forms iron maiden , drawing the name from a torture device mentioned in the man in the iron mask . december 31 the fourth annual new year 's rockin ' eve airs on abc , with performances by average white band , melissa manchester , freddy fender , and neil sedaka . elvis presley performs before the biggest audience of his career , at pontiac , michigan 's silverdome . during the show , elvis rips his pants onstage and has to leave to change . also in 1975 . john rutter becomes director of music at clare college , cambridge . billy davis , jr . and marilyn mccoo leave the 5th dimension and start solo careers . the goodies have five top twenty singles ( in the uk ) becoming , according to bill oddie , '' the first , the only and the most successful comedy rockers '' . ramones sign to sire records . first release of '' and the band played waltzing matilda '' , by john currie , on australian label m7 . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1975 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1975 . albums released . january . note : best sellers of the year are bold . other selected singles . published popular music . '' and all that jazz '' w . fred ebb m . john kander . introduced by chita rivera in the musical chicago '' anytime ( i 'll be there ) '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . paul anka '' at seventeen '' w.m . janis ian '' calypso '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . john denver '' i 'm not in love '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . graham gouldman & eric stewart '' i 'm sorry '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . john denver '' love will keep us together '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . neil sedaka & howard greenfield '' mamma mia '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . benny andersson , stig anderson & björn ulvaeus '' movin ' on up '' w.m . jeff barry and ja'net dubois , theme from the tv series the jeffersons '' new york state of mind '' w.m . billy joel '' one '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w . edward kleban m . marvin hamlisch '' rockin ' all over the world '' w.m . john c . fogerty '' wasted days and wasted nights '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . freddy fender & wayne duncan '' the way i want to touch you '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . toni tennille '' what i did for love '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w . edward kleban m . marvin hamlisch '' you '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . tom snow . classical music . samuel adler – symphony no . 5 , we are the echoes osvaldas balakauskas – sonata of the mountains claude bolling and jean-pierre rampal – suite for flute and jazz piano mario davidovsky – scenes from shir ha-shirim for soprano , two tenors , bass soli and chamber ensemble klaus huber – blätterlos for piano wojciech kilar – bogurodzica for mixed choir and orchestra theo loevendie – concerto for bass clarinet and orchestra , incantations witold lutosławski – les espaces du sommeil krzysztof meyer sonata for piano , no . 5 sonata for solo violin frederic rzewski – the people united will never be defeated ! karlheinz stockhausen harlekin , for clarinet , nr . 42 der kleine harlekin , for clarinet , nr . 42½ musik im bauch , for six percussionists and music boxes , nr . 41 tierkreis , for a melody and/or chording instrument , nr . 41½ alexander vustin – the word dmitri shostakovich – sonata for viola and piano , op . 147 ( his final work ) . opera . viktor ullmann – der kaiser von atlantis ( 16 december , bellevue centre , amsterdam ) john rutter – bang ! ( 14 march , fairfield halls , croydon ) aulis sallinen – the horseman ( 17 june , savonlinna opera festival ) . jazz . musical theatre . chicago – broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre and ran for 936 performances a chorus line ( marvin hamlisch and edward kleban ) – broadway production opened at the shubert theatre and ran for 6137 performances , the longest run of any broadway musical at the time a little night music ( stephen sondheim ) – london production dance with me – broadway production opened at the mayfair theatre and ran for 396 performances the wiz – broadway production opened at the majestic theatre and ran for 1672 performances pacific overtures – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre and ran for 192 performances . musical films . at long last love funny lady lisztomania the magic flute the rocky horror picture show tommy . births . january . january 2 doug robb ( hoobastank ) chris cheney , australian rock musician ( the living end ) january 3 – thomas bangalter ( daft punk ) january 5 – bradley cooper , american singer , actor , film maker , voice actor and producer ( a star is born , 2018 , starring lady gaga ) january 8 – harris jayaraj , indian film composer and producer january 13 – jason king , radio dj january 15 edith bowman , british radio dj belinda chapple , australian singer , actress and creative director january 17 – rami yacoub , swedish-born palestinian music producer and songwriter ( cheiron studios and maratone ) january 24 – paul marazzi , english singer ( a1 ) january 28 – lee latchford-evans , british singer ( steps ) january 29 – kelly packard , american singer-actress-hostess january 30 – yumi yoshimura , japanese singer ( puffy amiyumi ) . february . february 1 – big boi ( outkast ) february 4 – natalie imbruglia , australian singer-songwriter , model and actress february 5 – adam carson , drummer ( afi ) february 6 – tomoko kawase , japanese singer february 7 – wes borland ( limp bizkit ) february 14 – scott owen , australian rock musician ( the living end ) february 17 – harisu , south korean singer , model and actress february 18 – simon kvamm , danish singer , keyboard player , and actor ( nephew ) february 19 – daniel adair , canadian rock drummer ( nickelback ) february 20 – brian littrell , american singer ( backstreet boys ) february 21 – heri joensen , faroese rock musician ( týr ) february 23 – robert lopez , american composer and lyricist of musicals . march . march 4 – hawksley workman , canadian rock singer-songwriter march 8 – peggy zina , greek singer march 10 – jerry horton ( papa roach ) march 12 – kelle bryan , british singer ( eternal ) march 15 – will.i.am , american musician , rapper , singer , songwriter , dj , record producer , entrepreneur ( the black eyed peas ) march 17 justin hawkins , english singer-songwriter , musician , guitarist ( the darkness ) jair oliveira , brazilian singer/songwriter/composer march 18 – sutton foster , american actress , singer and dancer march 25 – melanie blatt , english singer-songwriter and actress ( all saints ) march 27 – fergie , ( stacy ferguson ) american singer-songwriter , dancer ( the black eyed peas ) . april . april 7 – karin dreijer , swedish singer-songwriter and record producer april 8 – anouk ( singer ) , dutch singer-songwriter and musician april 10 – chris carrabba , american rock musician ( dashboard confessional ) april 14 – stefano miceli , italian conductor and pianist 22 april – anders nyström , swedish guitarist ( katatonia & bloodbath ) 23 april – jonsi , icelandic musician and member of sigur ros april 26 joey jordison ( slipknot ) josé pasillas ( incubus ) . may . may 3 – maksim mrvica , croatian crossover pianist may 8 – enrique iglesias , spanish singer-songwriter , actor and record producer may 15 frode haltli , norwegian accordionist peter iwers , swedish rock bassist ( in flames ) may 16 tony kakko , finnish singer b.slade , american singer may 18 – jack johnson , american singer-songwriter , musician and documentary film-maker may 19 – jonas renkse , swedish vocalist ( katatonia ) and bassist ( bloodbath ) may 20 – andrew sega , american electronic musician may 24 – alex lacamoire , american musical arranger ( hamilton ) may 25 – lauryn hill , american singer-songwriter , rapper , record producer and actress ( the fugees ) may 27 – andré 3000 , american rapper , singer-songwriter , record producer , dancer and actor ( outkast ) may 29 – melanie brown , english singer-songwriter , presenter , television personality , dancer , actress , author and model ( spice girls ) . june . june 2 – gisle torvik , norwegian jazz guitarist june 4 – russell brand , english actor , comedian and dj june 8 – emm gryner , canadian singer-songwriter june 23 – kt tunstall , scottish singer-songwriter and musician . june 26 kj-52 , american rapper ( peace of mind ) marie-nicole lemieux , canadian operatic contralto june 28 jon nödtveidt , swedish singer ( d . 2006 ) ning baizura , malaysian singer . july . july 1 – sufjan stevens , american folk musician july 2 – erik ohlsson , millencolin july 5 – gunnar h . thomsen , faroese rock bassist ( týr ) july 6 – 50 cent , american rapper , actor , businessman , and investor july 9 isaac brock , american musician shona fraser , british-born music journalist and judge jack white , american musician , singer , songwriter , record producer and actor ( the white stripes ) july 11 – lil ' kim , american rapper july 12 – tracie spencer , american singer and actress july 14 taboo ( rapper ) , known as '' taboo '' , rapper/singer of the black eyed peas tameka cottle known as '' tiny '' , american singer/songwriter member of the group xscape july 18 daron malakian ( system of a down ) m.i.a . , british rapper , singer-songwriter , record producer , and activist july 21 – fredrik johansson , swedish rock guitarist july 22 – aile asszonyi , operatic soprano july 25 – håvard ellefsen ( mortiis ) . august . august 5 – eicca toppinen , finnish cellist ( apocalyptica ) august 7 – gaahl , black metal vocalist august 27 – björn gelotte swedish guitarist ( in flames ) august 27 – mase , rapper august 28 – marek szulen , electronic music composer august 31 – sara ramirez , mexican american actress , singer-songwriter , and activist . september . september 1 natalie bassingthwaighte , australian actress and singer omar rodríguez-lópez ( at the drive-in , the mars volta ) september 4 – mark ronson , british dj and music producer september 8 – richard hughes , british drummer ( keane ) september 9 – michael bublé , canadian-italian big band , swing , vocal jazz singer , songwriter , actor and record producer . september 11 – brad fischetti , lfo september 16 – shannon noll , australian singer september 17 – constantine maroulis , american singer ( pray for the soul of betty ) september 20 – asia argento , italian actress , singer , model , activist and director . september 21 – lil rob , chicano rapper september 22 – mystikal , rapper september 23 – chris hawkins , british radio personality september 27 – tim campbell ( actor ) , australian stage actor , actor , singer and musician ( anthony callea ) september 30 – georges-alain jones , french singer . october . october 3 – india arie , american singer-songwriter , actress , musician , and record producer october 7 damian kulash , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( ok go and 8in8 ) tim minchin , british-australian comedian , actor , writer , musician and director october 9 alain altinoglu , conductor sean ono lennon , son of john lennon and yoko ono , american singer , songwriter and actor brandy clark , american country music singer-songwriter . october 14 – shaznay lewis , english singer ( all saints ) october 27 max lilja , finnish cellist ( apocalyptica ) kate havnevik , norwegian film composer , songwriter and singer . october 30 – ian d'sa , canadian rock guitarist ( billy talent ) steve kazee , american singer and actor ( jenna dewan ) . november . november 1 – bo bice , american singer november 5 lisa scott-lee , welsh singer-songwriter and dancer ( steps ) jamie spaniolo ( jamie madrox ) , american rapper keala settle , american actress and singer . november 6 – mike herrera ( mxpx ) november 8 – ángel corella , spanish dancer november 12 – aaron solowoniuk , canadian rock drummer ( billy talent ) november 14 travis barker , american musician , drummer and producer ( blink-182 ) faye tozer , english singer-songwriter , dancer and stage actress ( steps ) november 19 – tamika scott , american singer/songwriter and producer november 20 dierks bentley , american singer-songwriter davey havok , afi jeffrey lewis , american anti-folk singer november 25 – paul mealor , composer . december . december 5 – paula patton , american songwriter under the pseudonym '' max '' december 13 – tom delonge , american musician ( blink-182 ) december 14 – justin furstenfeld ( blue october ) december 16 – benjamin kowalewicz , canadian rock lead singer ( billy talent ) december 18 – sia ( musician ) , australian singer-songwriter , record producer and music video director ( britney spears , kylie minogue , kate pierson ) december 21 – paloma herrera , argentine ballet dancer december 22 – amy wadge , british singer-songwriter december 23 – katie underwood , australian singer-songwriter ( bardot ) december 30 – yoma komatsu , former member of the female j-pop group beforu . unknown month . jonas jeberg , danish producer , singer songwriter , and musician . deaths . january 8 – richard tucker , operatic tenor , 61 ( heart attack ) january 11 – max lorenz , wagnerian tenor , 73 january 16 – paul beaver , electronic jazz keyboardist , 49 january 26 – toti dal monte , operatic soprano , 81 january 30 – boris blacher , composer , 72 february 3 – umm kulthum , singer , songwriter and actress february 4 – louis jordan , jazz musician , 66 february 10 – dave alexander , bassist ( the stooges ) , 27 ( pulmonary edema ) february 13 – eric thiman , english composer , 74 february 16–- norman treigle , operatic bass-baritone , 47 february 19 – luigi dallapiccola , composer , 71 february 22 – lionel tertis , viola player , 98 march 3 – sandy macpherson , theatre organist , 78 march 4 – cornel chiriac , romanian record producer , broadcaster and jazz musician , 33 ( murdered ) march 14 – will mastin , american vaudevillian , 100 march 15 – sandy brown , jazz musician , 46 ( heart attack ) march 16 – t-bone walker , african-american musician , 64 march 27 – sir arthur bliss , master of the queen 's musick , 83 april 12 – josephine baker , african-american dancer , 68 april 14 – michael flanders , lyricist , actor , humorist and singer ( flanders and swann ) , 53 ( intracranial berry aneurysm ) april 21 – sir jack westrup , musicologist , 70 april 23 – pete ham , singer and songwriter ( badfinger ) , 27 ( suicide ) may 2 – conchita badía , operatic soprano , 77 may 13 – bob wills , american western swing bandleader , 70 may 18 – leroy anderson , american composer and conductor , 66 june 4 – frida leider , operatic soprano , 87 june 7 – robert schmertz , american folk musician and architect , 77 june 16 – don robey , songwriter and producer , 72 june 21 – david tamkin , composer , 68 june 29 – tim buckley , singer-songwriter , 28 ( drug overdose ) july 5 – gilda dalla rizza , operatic soprano , 82 july 10 – ernst fischer , composer , 75 july 14 – zutty singleton , american jazz drummer , 77 july 19 – lefty frizzell , country music hall of fame singer , 47 ( stroke ) august 8 – julian cannonball adderley , american saxophonist , 46 august 9 – dmitri shostakovich , composer , 68 ( heart attack ) august 10 – neva carr glyn , operatic contralto , 67 september – flora perini , operatic soprano , 87 september 5 georg ots , estonian opera singer , 55 bill sprouse jr . , christian singer and songwriter , 26 ( heart attack ) september 6 – shelton brooks , canadian-born african american song composer , 89 september 20 – vincent lopez , american bandleader , 79 october 1 – al jackson , jr . , r & b drummer , 39 ( shot ) october 19 – cátulo castillo , tango composer , 69 october 28 – oliver nelson , jazz saxophonist , 43 october 30 – john scott trotter , u.s . arranger and conductor december 8 – gary thain , rock bassist , 27 ( heroin overdose ) december 14 – mongezi feza , jazz trumpeter and flautist , 30 ( pneumonia ) december 17 noble sissle , u.s . bandleader and singer , 86 hound dog taylor , blues musician , 60 december 24 peter gibbs , violinist bernard herrmann , composer , 64 tilly losch , dancer and actress , 72 december 25 – julio cueva , trumpeter , bandleader and composer , 78 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1975 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1975 . leeds international piano competition . dimitri alexeev . sangeet natak akademi fellowship . ravi shankar zubin mehta . references .