Modchip

function and construction . modchips operate by replacing or overriding a system 's protection hardware or software . they achieve this by either exploiting existing interfaces in an unintended or undocumented manner , or by actively manipulating the system 's internal communication , sometimes to the point of re-routing it to substitute parts provided by the modchip . most modchips consist of one or more integrated circuits ( microcontrollers , fpgas , or cplds ) , often complemented with discrete parts , usually packaged on a small pcb to fit within the console system it is designed for . although there are modchips that can be reprogrammed for different purposes , most modchips are designed to work within only one console system or even only one specific hardware version . modchips typically require some degree of technical skill to install since they must be connected to a console 's circuitry , most commonly by soldering wires to select traces or chip legs on a system 's circuit board . some modchips allow for installation by directly soldering the modchip 's contacts to the console 's circuit ( '' quicksolder '' ) , by the precise positioning of electrical contacts ( '' solderless '' ) , or , in rare cases , by plugging them into a system 's internal or external connector . memory cards or cartridges that offer functions similar to modchips work on a completely different concept , namely by exploiting flaws in the system 's handling of media . such devices are not referred to as modchips , even if they are frequently traded under this umbrella term . the diversity of hardware modchips operate on and varying methods they use mean that while modchips are often used for the same goal , they may work in vastly different ways , even if they are intended for use on the same console . some of the first modchips for the nintendo wii , known as drive chips , modify the behaviour and communication of the optical drive to bypass security . on the xbox 360 , a common modchip took advantage of the fact short periods of instability in the cpu could be used to fairly reliably lead it to incorrectly compare security signatures . the precision required in this attack meant that the modchip had to make use of a cpld . other modchips , such as the xenogc and clones for the nintendo gamecube , invoke a debug mode where security measures are reduced or absent ( in which case a stock atmel avr microcontroller was used ) . a more recent innovation are optical disk drive emulators or odde , which replace the optical disk drive and allow data to come from another source bypassing the need to circumvent any security . these often make use of fpgas to enable them to accurately emulate timing and performance characteristics of the optical drives . history . most cartridge-based console systems did not have modchips produced for them . they usually implemented copy protection and regional lockout with game cartridges , both on hardware and software level . converters or passthrough devices have been used to circumvent the restrictions , while flash memory devices ( game backup devices ) were widely adopted in later years to copy game media . early in the transition from solid-state to optical media , cd-based console systems did not have regional market segmentation or copy protection measures due to the rarity and high cost of user-writable media at the time . modchips started to surface with the playstation system , due to the increasing availability and affordability of cd writers and the increasing sophistication of drm protocols . at the time , a modchip 's sole purpose was to allow the use of imported and copied game media . today , modchips are available for practically every current console system , often in a great number of variations . in addition to circumventing regional lockout and copy protection mechanisms , modern modchips may introduce more sophisticated modifications to the system , such as allowing the use of user-created software ( homebrew ) , expanding the hardware capabilities of its host system , or even installing an alternative operating system to completely re-purpose the host system ( e.g . for use as a home theater pc ) . anti-modchip measures . most modchips open the system to copied media , therefore the availability of a modchip for a console system is undesirable for console manufacturers . they react by removing the intrusion points exploited by a modchip from subsequent hardware or software versions , changing the pcb layout the modchips are customized for , or by having the firmware or software detect an installed modchip and refuse operation as a consequence . since modchips often hook into fundamental functions of the host system that can not be removed or adjusted , these measures may not completely prevent a modchip from functioning but only prompt an adjustment of its installation process or programming , e.g . to include measures to make it undetectable ( '' stealth '' ) to its host system . with the advent of online services to be used by video game consoles , some manufacturers have executed their possibilities within the service 's license agreement to ban consoles equipped with modchips from using those services . xbox live terms of use , section 14 in an effort to dissuade modchip creation , some console manufacturers included the option to run homebrew software or even an alternative operating system on their consoles . however , some of these features have been withdrawn at a later date . microsoft xna linux for playstation 2 linux for playstation 3 an argument can be made that a console system remains largely untouched by modchips as long as their manufacturers provide an official way of running unlicensed third-party software . . legality . one of the most prominent functions of many modchips & mdash ; the circumvention of copy protection mechanisms & mdash ; is outlawed by many countries ' copyright laws such as the digital millennium copyright act in the united states , the european copyright directive and its various implementations by the eu member countries , and the australian copyright act . other laws may apply to the many diversified functions of a modchip , e.g . australian law specifically allowing the circumvention of region coding . the ambiguity of applicable law , its nonuniform interpretation by the courts , and constant profound changes and amendments to copyright law do not allow for a definitive statement on the legality of modchips . a modchip 's legality under a country 's legislature may only be individually asserted in court . most of the very few cases that have been brought before a court ended with the conviction of the modchip merchant or the manufacturer under the respective country 's anti-circumvention laws . a small number of cases in the united kingdom and australia were dismissed under the argument that a system 's copy protection mechanism would not be able to prevent the actual infringement of copyright & mdash ; the actual process of copying game media & mdash ; and therefore can not be considered an effective technical protection measure protected by anti-circumvention laws . in 2006 , australian copyright law has been amended to effectively close this legal loophole . australian copyright amendment act 2006 in a 2017 lawsuit against a retailer , a canadian court ruled in favor of nintendo under anti-circumvention provisions in canadian copyright law , which prohibit any breaching of technical protection measures . the court ruled that even though the retailer claimed the products could be used for homebrew , thus asserting exemptions for maintaining interoperability , the court ruled that because nintendo offers development kits for its platforms , interoperability could be achieved without breaching tpms , and thus the defence is invalid . . alternatives . an alternative of installing a modchip is a process of softmodding a device . a softmodded device does not need to permanently have any additional hardware pieces inside . instead , the software of a device or its internal part is modified in order to change the device 's behaviour .