FOXP2

structure and function . as a fox protein , foxp2 contains a forkhead-box domain . in addition , it contains a polyglutamine tract , a zinc finger and a leucine zipper . the protein attaches to the dna of other proteins and controls their activity through the forkhead-box domain . only a few targeted genes have been identified , however researchers believe that there could be up to hundreds of other genes targeted by the foxp2 gene . the forkhead box p2 protein is active in the brain and other tissues before and after birth , many studies show that it is paramount for the growth of nerve cells and transmission between them . the foxp2 gene is also involved in synaptic plasticity , making it imperative for learning and memory . foxp2 is required for proper brain and lung development . knockout mice with only one functional copy of the foxp2 gene have significantly reduced vocalizations as pups . knockout mice with no functional copies of foxp2 are runted , display abnormalities in brain regions such as the purkinje layer , and die an average of 21 days after birth from inadequate lung development . foxp2 is expressed in many areas of the brain , including the basal ganglia and inferior frontal cortex , where it is essential for brain maturation and speech and language development . in mice , the gene was found to be twice as highly expressed in male pups than female pups , which correlated with an almost double increase in the number of vocalisations the male pups made when separated from mothers . conversely , in human children aged 4–5 , the gene was found to be 30 % more expressed in the broca 's areas of female children . the researchers suggested that the gene is more active in '' the more communicative sex '' . the expression of foxp2 is subject to post-transcriptional regulation , particularly microrna ( mirna ) , which binds to multiple mirna binding-sites in the neocortex , causing the repression of the foxp2 3 ' untranslated region . three amino acid substitutions distinguish the human foxp2 protein from that found in mice , while two amino acid substitutions distinguish the human foxp2 protein from that found in chimpanzees , but only one of these changes is unique to humans . evidence from genetically manipulated mice and human neuronal cell models suggests that these changes affect the neural functions of foxp2 . clinical significance . the foxp2 gene has been implicated in several cognitive functions including ; general brain development , language , and synaptic plasticity . the foxp2 gene region acts as a transcription factor for the forkhead box p2 protein . transcription factors affect other regions , and the forkhead box p2 protein has been suggested to also act as a transcription factor for hundreds of genes . this prolific involvement opens the possibility that the foxp2 gene is much more extensive than originally thought . other targets of transcription have been researched without correlation to foxp2 . specifically , foxp2 has been investigated in correlation with autism and dyslexia , however with no mutation was discovered as the cause . one well identified target is language . although some research disagrees with this correlation , the majority of research shows that a mutated foxp2 causes the observed production deficiency . there is some evidence that the linguistic impairments associated with a mutation of the foxp2 gene are not simply the result of a fundamental deficit in motor control . brain imaging of affected individuals indicates functional abnormalities in language-related cortical and basal ganglia regions , demonstrating that the problems extend beyond the motor system . mutations in foxp2 are among several ( 26 genes plus 2 intergenic ) loci which correlate to adhd diagnosis in adults – clinical adhd is an umbrella label for a heterogeneous group of genetic and neurological phenomena which may result from foxp2 mutations or other causes . a 2020 genome-wide association study ( gwas ) implicates single-nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) of foxp2 in susceptibility to cannabis use disorder . . language disorder . it is theorized that the translocation of the 7q31.2 region of the foxp2 gene causes a severe language impairment called developmental verbal dyspraxia ( dvd ) or childhood apraxia of speech ( cas ) so far this type of mutation has only been discovered in three families across the world including the original ke family . a missense mutation causing an arginine-to-histidine substitution ( r553h ) in the dna-binding domain is thought to be the abnormality in ke . this would cause a normally basic residue to be fairly acidic and highly reactive at the body 's ph . a heterozygous nonsense mutation , r328x variant , produces a truncated protein involved in speech and language difficulties in one ke individual and two of their close family members . r553h and r328x mutations also affected nuclear localization , dna-binding , and the transactivation ( increased gene expression ) properties of foxp2 . these individuals present with deletions , translocations , and missense mutations . when tasked with repetition and verb generation , these individuals with dvd/cas had decreased activation in the putamen and broca 's area in fmri studies . these areas are commonly known as areas of language function . this is one of the primary reasons that foxp2 is known as a language gene . they have delayed onset of speech , difficulty with articulation including , slurred speech , stuttering , and poor pronunciation , as well as dyspraxia . it is believed that a major part of this speech deficit comes from an inability to coordinate the movements necessary to produce normal speech including mouth and tongue shaping . additionally , there are more general impairments with the processing of the grammatical and linguistic aspects of speech . these findings suggest that the effects of foxp2 are not limited to motor control , as they include comprehension among other cognitive language functions . general mild motor and cognitive deficits are noted across the board . clinically these patients can also have difficulty coughing , sneezing , and/or clearing their throats . while foxp2 has been proposed to play a critical role in the development of speech and language , this view has been challenged by the fact that the gene is also expressed in other mammals as well as birds and fish that do not speak . it has also been proposed that the foxp2 transcription-factor is not so much a hypothetical 'language gene ' but rather part of a regulatory machinery related to externalization of speech . . evolution . image : browserfoxp2.jpg human foxp2 gene and evolutionary conservation is shown in a multiple alignment ( at bottom of figure ) in this image from the ucsc genome browser . note that conservation tends to cluster around coding regions ( exons ) . thumb right upright 1.25 the foxp2 gene is highly conserved in mammals . the human gene differs from that in non-human primates by the substitution of two amino acids , a threonine to asparagine substitution at position 303 ( t303n ) and an asparagine to serine substitution at position 325 ( n325s ) . in mice it differs from that of humans by three substitutions , and in zebra finch by seven amino acids . one of the two amino acid differences between human and chimps also arose independently in carnivores and bats . similar foxp2 proteins can be found in songbirds , fish , and reptiles such as alligators . dna sampling from homo neanderthalensis bones indicates that their foxp2 gene is a little different though largely similar to those of homo sapiens ( i.e . humans ) . see also previous genetic analysis had suggested that the h . sapiens foxp2 gene became fixed in the population around 125,000 years ago . some researchers consider the neanderthal findings to indicate that the gene instead swept through the population over 260,000 years ago , before our most recent common ancestor with the neanderthals . other researchers offer alternative explanations for how the h . sapiens version would have appeared in neanderthals living 43,000 years ago . according to a 2002 study , the foxp2 gene showed indications of recent positive selection . some researchers have speculated that positive selection is crucial for the evolution of language in humans . others , however , were unable to find a clear association between species with learned vocalizations and similar mutations in foxp2 . a 2018 analysis of a large sample of globally distributed genomes confirmed there was no evidence of positive selection , suggesting that the original signal of positive selection may be driven by sample composition . insertion of both human mutations into mice , whose version of foxp2 otherwise differs from the human and chimpanzee versions in only one additional base pair , causes changes in vocalizations as well as other behavioral changes , such as a reduction in exploratory tendencies , and a decrease in maze learning time . a reduction in dopamine levels and changes in the morphology of certain nerve cells are also observed . . interactions . foxp2 is known to regulate cntnap2 , ctbp1 , srpx2 and scn3a . foxp2 downregulates cntnap2 , a member of the neurexin family found in neurons . cntnap2 is associated with common forms of language impairment . foxp2 also downregulates the sushi repeat-containing protein x-linked 2 ( srpx2 ) . it directly reduces its expression , by binding to its gene 's promoter . srpx2 is involved in glutamatergic synapse formation in the cerebral cortex and is more highly expressed in childhood . srpx2 appears to specifically increase the number of glutamatergic synapses in the brain , while leaving inhibitory gabaergic synapses unchanged and not affecting dendritic spine length or shape . on the other hand , foxp2 's activity does reduce dendritic spine length and shape , in addition to number , indicating it has other regulatory roles in dendritic morphology . . in other animals . chimpanzees . in chimpanzees , foxp2 differs from the human version by two amino acids . a study in germany sequenced foxp2 's complementary dna in chimps and other species to compare it with human complementary dna in order to find the specific changes in the sequence . foxp2 was found to be functionally different in humans compared to chimps . since foxp2 was also found to have an effect on other genes , its effects on other genes is also being studied . researchers deduced that there could also be further clinical applications in the direction of these studies in regards to illnesses that show effects on human language ability . . mice . in a mouse foxp2 gene knockouts , loss of both copies of the gene causes severe motor impairment related to cerebellar abnormalities and lack of ultrasound vocalisations normally elicited when pups are removed from their mothers . these vocalizations have important communicative roles in mother-offspring interactions . loss of one copy was associated with impairment of ultrasonic vocalisations and a modest developmental delay . male mice on encountering female mice produce complex ultrasonic vocalisations that have characteristics of song . mice that have the r552h point mutation carried by the ke family show cerebellar reduction and abnormal synaptic plasticity in striatal and cerebellar circuits . humanized foxp2 mice display altered cortico-basal ganglia circuits . the human allele of the foxp2 gene was transferred into the mouse embryos through homologous recombination to create humanized foxp2 mice . the human variant of foxp2 also had an effect on the exploratory behavior of the mice . in comparison to knockout mice with one non-functional copy of foxp2 , the humanized mouse model showed opposite effects when testing its effect on the levels of dopamine , plasticity of synapses , patterns of expression in the striatum and behavior that was exploratory in nature . when foxp2 expression was altered in mice , it affected many different processes including the learning motor skills and the plasticity of synapses . additionally , foxp2 is found more in the sixth layer of the cortex than in the fifth , and this is consistent with it having greater roles in sensory integration . foxp2 was also found in the medial geniculate nucleus of the mouse brain , which is the processing area that auditory inputs must go through in the thalamus . it was found that its mutations play a role in delaying the development of language learning . it was also found to be highly expressed in the purkinje cells and cerebellar nuclei of the cortico-cerebellar circuits . high foxp2 expression has also been shown in the spiny neurons that express dopamine receptor d1 in the striatum , substantia nigra , subthalamic nucleus and ventral tegmental area . the negative effects of the mutations of foxp2 in these brain regions on motor abilities were shown in mice through tasks in lab studies . when analyzing the brain circuitry in these cases , scientists found greater levels of dopamine and decreased lengths of dendrites , which caused defects in long-term depression , which is implicated in motor function learning and maintenance . through eeg studies , it was also found that these mice had increased levels of activity in their striatum , which contributed to these results . there is further evidence for mutations of targets of the foxp2 gene shown to have roles in schizophrenia , epilepsy , autism , bipolar disorder and intellectual disabilities . . bats . foxp2 has implications in the development of bat echolocation . contrary to apes and mice , foxp2 is extremely diverse in microbat . twenty-two sequences of non-bat eutherian mammals revealed a total number of 20 nonsynonymous mutations in contrast to half that number of bat sequences , which showed 44 nonsynonymous mutations . all cetaceans share three amino acid substitutions , but no differences were found between echolocating toothed whales and non-echolocating baleen cetaceans . within bats , however , amino acid variation correlated with different echolocating types . . birds . in songbirds , foxp2 most likely regulates genes involved in neuroplasticity . gene knockdown of foxp2 in area x of the basal ganglia in songbirds results in incomplete and inaccurate song imitation . overexpression of foxp2 was accomplished through injection of adeno-associated virus serotype 1 ( aav1 ) into area x of the brain . this overexpression produced similar effects to that of knockdown ; juvenile zebra finch birds were unable to accurately imitate their tutors . similarly , in adult canaries , higher foxp2 levels also correlate with song changes . levels of foxp2 in adult zebra finches are significantly higher when males direct their song to females than when they sing song in other contexts . “ directed ” singing refers to when a male is singing to a female usually for a courtship display . “ undirected ” singing occurs when for example , a male sings when other males are present or is alone . studies have found that foxp2 levels vary depending on the social context . when the birds were singing undirected song , there was a decrease of foxp2 expression in area x . this downregulation was not observed and foxp2 levels remained stable in birds singing directed song . differences between song-learning and non-song-learning birds have been shown to be caused by differences in foxp2 gene expression , rather than differences in the amino acid sequence of the foxp2 protein . zebrafish . in zebrafish , foxp2 is expressed in the ventral and dorsal thalamus , telencephalon , diencephalon where it likely plays a role in nervous system development . the zebrafish foxp2 gene has an 85 % similarity to the human fox2p ortholog . . history . foxp2 and its gene were discovered as a result of investigations on an english family known as the ke family , half of whom ( 15 individuals across three generations ) suffered from a speech and language disorder called developmental verbal dyspraxia . their case was studied at the ucl institute of child health . in 1990 , myrna gopnik , professor of linguistics at mcgill university , reported that the disorder-affected ke family had severe speech impediment with incomprehensible talk , largely characterized by grammatical deficits . she hypothesized that the basis was not of learning or cognitive disability , but due to genetic factors affecting mainly grammatical ability . ( her hypothesis led to a popularised existence of '' grammar gene '' and a controversial notion of grammar-specific disorder . ) in 1995 , the university of oxford and the institute of child health researchers found that the disorder was purely genetic . remarkably , the inheritance of the disorder from one generation to the next was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance , i.e . , mutation of only a single gene on an autosome ( non-sex chromosome ) acting in a dominant fashion . this is one of the few known examples of mendelian ( monogenic ) inheritance for a disorder affecting speech and language skills , which typically have a complex basis involving multiple genetic risk factors . in 1998 , oxford university geneticists simon fisher , anthony monaco , cecilia s . l . lai , jane a . hurst , and faraneh vargha-khadem identified an autosomal dominant monogenic inheritance that is localized on a small region of chromosome 7 from dna samples taken from the affected and unaffected members . the chromosomal region ( locus ) contained 70 genes . the locus was given the official name '' spch1 '' ( for speech-and-language-disorder-1 ) by the human genome nomenclature committee . mapping and sequencing of the chromosomal region was performed with the aid of bacterial artificial chromosome clones . around this time , the researchers identified an individual who was unrelated to the ke family but had a similar type of speech and language disorder . in this case , the child , known as cs , carried a chromosomal rearrangement ( a translocation ) in which part of chromosome 7 had become exchanged with part of chromosome 5 . the site of breakage of chromosome 7 was located within the spch1 region . in 2001 , the team identified in cs that the mutation is in the middle of a protein-coding gene . using a combination of bioinformatics and rna analyses , they discovered that the gene codes for a novel protein belonging to the forkhead-box ( fox ) group of transcription factors . as such , it was assigned with the official name of foxp2 . when the researchers sequenced the foxp2 gene in the ke family , they found a heterozygous point mutation shared by all the affected individuals , but not in unaffected members of the family and other people . this mutation is due to an amino-acid substitution that inhibits the dna-binding domain of the foxp2 protein . further screening of the gene identified multiple additional cases of foxp2 disruption , including different point mutations and chromosomal rearrangements , providing evidence that damage to one copy of this gene is sufficient to derail speech and language development .