John Keble

early life . keble was born on 25 april 1792 in fairford , gloucestershire , where his father , also named john keble , was vicar of coln st . aldwyns . he and his brother thomas were educated at home by their father until each went to oxford . in 1806 , keble won a scholarship to corpus christi college , oxford . he excelled in his studies and in 1810 achieved a double first class in both latin and mathematics . in 1811 , he won the university prizes for both the english and latin essays and became a fellow of oriel college . he was for some years a tutor and examiner at the university of oxford . while still at oxford , he was ordained in 1816 , kiefer , james e . '' john keble , priest , poet , renewer of the church '' , biographical sketches of memorable christians of the past . becoming a curate to his father and then curate of st michael and st martin 's church , eastleach martin , in gloucestershire while still residing at oxford . on the death of his mother in 1823 , he left oxford and returned to live with his father and two surviving sisters at fairford . between 1824 and 1835 , he was three times offered a position and each time declined on the grounds that he ought not separate himself from his father and only surviving sister . in 1828 , he was nominated as provost of oriel college but not elected . julian , john . '' john keble '' , dictionary of hymnology ( 1907 ) griffin , john r . john keble , saint of anglicanism . mercer university press , 1987 , p . 13 . . the christian year . meantime , he had been writing the christian year , a book of poems for the sundays and feast days of the church year . it appeared in 1827 and was very effective in spreading keble 's devotional and theological views . it was intended as an aid to meditation and devotion following the services of the prayer book . though at first anonymous , its authorship soon became known , with keble in 1831 appointed to the chair of poetry at oxford , which he held until 1841 . victorian scholar michael wheeler calls the christian year simply '' the most popular volume of verse in the nineteenth century '' . in his essay on tractarian aesthetics and the romantic tradition , gregory goodwin claims that the christian year is '' keble 's greatest contribution to the oxford movement and to english literature . '' as evidence , goodwin cites e . b . pusey 's report that 95 editions of this devotional text were printed during keble 's lifetime , and '' at the end of the year following his death , the number had arisen to a hundred-and-nine '' . by the time that the copyright expired in 1873 , over 375,000 copies had been sold in britain and 158 editions had been published . despite its widespread appeal among the victorian readers , the popularity of keble 's the christian year faded in the 20th century despite the familiarity of certain well-known hymns . at oxford , keble met john coleridge who introduced him to the writings not only of his uncle , samuel taylor coleridge , but also of wordsworth . he dedicated his praelectiones to and greatly admired wordsworth , who once offered to go over the christian year with a view to correcting the english . to the same college friend , he was indebted for an introduction to robert southey , whom he found to be '' a noble and delightful character , '' and the writings of the three , especially wordsworth , had much to do with the formation of keble 's own mind as a poet . . tractarianism and vicar of hursley . in 1833 , his famous assize sermon on '' national apostasy '' gave the first impulse to the oxford movement , also known as the tractarian movement . it marked the opening of a term of the civil and criminal courts and is officially addressed to the judges and officers of the court , exhorting them to deal justly . keble contributed seven pieces for tracts for the times , a series of short papers dealing with faith and practice . along with his colleagues , including john henry newman and edward pusey , he became a leading light in the movement but did not follow newman into the roman catholic church . in 1835 , his father died , and keble and his sister retired from fairford to coln . in the same year he married miss clarke , and the vicarage of hursley in hampshire , becoming vacant , was offered to him ; he accepted . in 1836 , he settled in hursley and remained for the rest of his life as a parish priest at all saints ' church . in 1841 his neighbour charlotte mary yonge , a resident at otterbourne house in the adjacent village of otterbourne , where keble was responsible for building a new church , compiled the child 's christian year : hymns for every sunday and holy-day to which keble contributed four poems , including bethlehem , above all cities blest . in 1857 , he wrote one of his more important works , his treatise on eucharistical adoration , written in support of george denison , who had been attacked for his views on the eucharist . . other writings . in 1830 , he published his edition of hooker 's works . in 1838 , he began to edit , in conjunction with edward bouverie pusey and john henry newman , the library of the fathers . a volume of academical and occasional sermons appeared in 1847 . other works were a life of wilson , bishop of sodor and man . after his death , letters of spiritual counsel and 12 volumes of parish sermons were published . extracts from a number of his verses found their way into popular collections of hymns for public worship , such as the voice that breathed o'er eden , sun of my soul , thou saviour dear , blest are the pure in heart and new every morning is the love . lyra innocentium was being composed while keble was stricken by what he always seems to have regarded as the great sorrow of his life , the decision of newman to leave the church of england for catholicism . . death . keble died in bournemouth on 29 march 1866 at the hermitage hotel , after visiting the area to try and recover from a long-term illness as he believed the sea air had therapeutic qualities . he is buried in all saints ' churchyard , hursley . hymntime.com . legacy . keble has been described thus : he was absolutely without ambition , with no care for the possession of power or influence , hating show and excitement , and distrustful of his own abilities . though shy and awkward with strangers , he was happy and at ease among his friends , and their love and sympathy drew out all his droll playfulness of wit and manner . in personal appearance he was about middle height , with rather square and sloping shoulders , which made him look short until he pulled himself up , as he often did with 'sprightly dignity . ' his head , says mozley , 'was one of the most beautifully formed heads in the world , ' the face rather plain-featured , with a large unshapely mouth , but the whole redeemed by a bright smile which played naturally over the lips ; and under a broad and smooth forehead he had 'clear , brilliant , penetrating eyes which lighted up quickly with merriment kindled into fire in a moment of indignation . a quiet country clergyman , with a very moderate income , who sedulously avoided public distinctions , and held tenaciously to an unpopular school all his life . keble 's feast day is kept on 14 july ( the anniversary of his assize sermon ) in the church of england , and a commemoration observed on 29 march ( the anniversary of his death ) elsewhere in the anglican communion . keble college , oxford was founded in his memory , and john keble church , mill hill and the ancient clapper bridge over the river leach near the church in which he was curate in the village of eastleach martin were named after him . the view from bulverton hill , sidmouth , where keble was a frequent visitor , is thought to have inspired some of his best loved work . the hill commands a panoramic view of the lower otter valley and dartmoor in the distance . folklore suggests that his favourite spot was where a wooden bench known as keble 's seat has been in place for many years . the 'te deum ' window in the south-east transept of st peter 's church , bournemouth , was commissioned as a memorial to keble , who had preferred to sit in the transept when worshipping at st peter 's daily in the last months of his life . later , in 1906 , the transept was re-configured as the keble chapel . lives of keble include one by john taylor coleridge ( 1869 ) , who said , '' the christian year is so wonderfully scriptural . keble 's mind was , by long , patient and affectionate study of scripture , so imbued with it that its language , its train of thought , its mode of reasoning , seems to flow out into his poetry , almost , one should think , unconsciously to himself . '' another is by walter lock ( 1895 ) . in 1963 georgina battiscombe wrote a biography titled john keble : a study in limitations . references . further reading . blair , kirstie , ed . ( 2004 ) john keble in context . london : anthem ( papers from a conference held at keble college , oxford , may 2003 . ) . hooker , richard ( 1841 ) the works of that learned and judicious divine mr . richard hooker : with an account of his life and death by isaac walton ; arranged by the rev . john keble , m.a . late fellow of oriel college , oxford , professor of poetry . 3 vols . oxford : university press keble , john ( 1912 ) keble 's lectures on poetry , 1832–1841 ; translated by edward kershaw francis . ( in : aesthetics and religion in nineteenth-century britain . ( 6 vols . ) ) bristol : thoemmes , 2003 ( reprint of the 1912 edition ) lott , bernard maurice ( 1960 ) the poetry of john keble , with special reference to the christian year and his contribution to the lyra apostolica . thesis ( phd ) -- university of london , 1960 rowlands , john henry lewis ( 1989 ) . church , state , and society , 1827–1845 : the attitudes of john keble , richard hurrell froude , and john henry newman . worthing , eng . : p . smith of churchman publishing ; folkestone , eng . : distr . by bailey book distribution . woods , mark robert ( 1987 ) john keble 's theory of poetry and its sources . thesis ( m.litt . ) – university of bristol , 1987 . external links . john keble , the online books page , university of pennsylvania john keble papers , 1841-1866 at pitts theology library , candler school of theology john keble quotes at quotetails . . . kebles seat john keble 's coastal vantage point is celebrated by sidmouth estate owners exeter express and echo