1918 in film

events . january 27 – tarzan makes his film debut in tarzan of the apes . march 10 – warner bros . release their first produced picture , my four years in germany . july – the animated the sinking of the lusitania is one of the first examples of animation being used for something other than comedy . following litigation for anti-trust activities , the motion picture patents company disbands . louis b . mayer arrives in los angeles and forms louis b . mayer pictures corporation . 28 & nbsp ; mm safety standard film , designed by alexander victor , becomes one of the earliest film formats to use '' safety film '' bases in order to safeguard the amateur market against nitrate fires . top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . notable films released in 1918 . argentina . buenos aires tenebroso , directed by juan glize en un día de gloria , directed by mario gallo and alberto traversa la garra porteña , directed by juan glize sin dejar rastros , directed by quirino cristiani violeta o la reina del tango , directed by juan glize . germany . alraune , die henkerstochter , genannt die rote hanne carmen , directed by ernst lubitsch , starring pola negri das tagebuch des dr . hart , directed by paul leni i do n't want to be a man ( ich möchte kein mann sein ) , directed by ernst lubitsch . hungary . 99 ( 1918 film ) , directed by michael curtiz , starring : cläre lotto and béla lugosi alraune , directed by mihály kertész , starring : géza erdélyi and gyula gál ( lost film ) casanova , directed by alfréd deésy , starring : béla lugosi and alfréd deésy faun , directed by alexander korda , starring : gábor rajnay and artúr somlay mary ann , directed by alexander korda , starring : ica von lenkeffy and tivadar uray álarcosbál alfréd deésy , starring : béla lugosi a víg özvegy , directed by mihály kertész az ördög , directed by mihály kertész karoly bakak , directed by zoltan korda az élet királya , directed by alfréd deésy , starring : béla lugosi and norbert dán küzdelem a létért , directed by alfréd deésy , starring : béla lugosi lili , directed by cornelius hintner , starring : béla lugosi lulu , directed by mihály kertész , starring : béla lugosi the sunflower woman , directed by mihály kertész , starring : lucy doraine , cläre lotto and iván petrovich a víg özvegy , directed by mihály kertész , starring : mihály várkonyi , berta valero , endre boross árpád id . latabár , miklós szomory and józsef bánhidy . italy . fabiola directed by enrico guazzoni . france . the tenth symphony ( la dixième symphonie ) , directed by abel gance , starring séverin-mars and jean toulout tih minh , directed by louis feuillade , starring rené cresté vendemiaire , directed by louis feuillade . great britain . victory and peace , directed by herbert brenon . sweden . the outlaw and his wife ( berg-ejvind och hans hustru ) , directed by & starring victor sjöström . united states . amarilly of clothes-line alley , directed by marshall neilan , starring mary pickford among the cannibal isles of the south pacific are crooks dishonest ? , a harold lloyd short arizona , starring douglas fairbanks the bell boy , a fatty arbuckle / buster keaton short 'blue blazes ' rawden , starring william s . hart the blue bird , directed by maurice tourneur bound in morocco , directed by allan dwan , starring douglas fairbanks the burden of proof , directed by julius steger ; starring marion davies cecilia of the pink roses , directed by julius steger ; starring marion davies the cook , a fatty arbuckle/buster keaton short cupid angling , starring ruth roland the eyes of julia deep , starring mary miles minter the ghost of slumber mountain the goddess of lost lake , starring louise glaum headin ' south , directed by allan dwan , starring douglas fairbanks the heart of humanity , starring erich von stroheim hearts of the world , directed by d.w . griffith , starring lillian gish and dorothy gish the house of mirth , directed by albert capellani , starring katherine corri harris huck and tom the lamb , a harold lloyd short . men who have made love to me , starring mary maclane mickey , directed by f . richard jones , starring mabel normand m'liss , directed by marshall neilan , starring mary pickford and thomas meighan moonshine , a fatty arbuckle/buster keaton short my four years in germany , the first film produced by the four warner brothers on the quiet , directed by chester withey , starring john barrymore out of the inkwell , an animated film directed by max fleischer out west , a fatty arbuckle/buster keaton short the romance of tarzan , starring elmo lincoln salomé , directed by j . gordon edwards , starring theda bara the sinking of the lusitania , a short animated propaganda film by winsor mccay ; likely the longest animated film of its time . stella maris , directed by marshall neilan , starring mary pickford tarzan of the apes , directed by scott sidney , starring elmo lincoln and enid markey uncle tom 's cabin under the yoke , directed by j . gordon edwards , starring theda bara under the greenwood tree directed by emile chautard starring elsie ferguson the whispering chorus , starring raymond hatton and kathlyn williams why pick on me ? , starring harold lloyd and bebe daniels . u.s.s.r . father sergius , directed by yakov protazanov , starring ivan mozzukhin . comedy film series . only the films of the series released in 1918 are collected . buster keaton ( 1917–1944 ) . films starring roscoe arbuckle , featuring buster keaton released in 1918 : january 20 : out west as sheriff / saloon owner . march 18 : the bell boy as bellboy . charlie chaplin ( 1914–1940 ) . 11 august : triple trouble ; compilation assembled by leo white with scenes from police and an unfinished short , life , along with new material shot by white . chaplin includes this production in the filmography of his autobiography . may 1918 : chase me charlie ; a seven-reel montage of essanay films , edited by langford reed . released in england . charlie chaplin wrote , produced , directed , and starred in 9 films for his own production company between 1918 and 1923 . these films were distributed by first national . below the movies released in 1918 : 14 april : a dog 's life 29 september : the bond 20 october : shoulder arms : uncompleted and unreleased films how to make movies : never assembled , although parts were used in the chaplin revue ( see below ) reconstructed in 1981 by kevin brownlow and david gill untitled film : a charity film co-starring harry lauder . harold lloyd ( 1913–1938 ) . glasses character ( '' the boy '' ) : the tip the lamb hit him again beat it a gasoline wedding look pleasant , please here come the girls let 's go on the jump follow the crowd pipe the whiskers as janitor it 's a wild life hey there ! kicked out the non-stop kid two-gun gussie fireman save my child the city slicker sic 'em , towser somewhere in turkey are crooks dishonest ? – sometimes wrongly titled as doing , doing , done an ozark romance kicking the germ out of germany that 's him bride and gloom two scrambled bees in his bonnet swing your partners why pick on me ? nothing but trouble back to the woods hear 'em rave take a chance she loves me not . lupino lane ( 1915–1939 ) . short films acting as his character mr . butterbun released in 1918 : his busy day his salad days love and lobster the blunders of mr . butterbun : trips and tribunals the blunders of mr . butterbun : unexpected treasure the haunted hotel . births . january 29 – john forsythe , actor ( died 2010 ) february 4 – ida lupino , actress , director ( died 1995 ) february 16 – patty andrews , singer , actress , member of the andrews sisters ( died 2013 ) march 1 – roger delgado , actor ( died 1973 ) march 9 – mickey spillane , writer , actor ( died 2006 ) april 17 william holden , actor ( died 1981 ) anne shirley , actress ( died 1993 ) april 18 – shinobu hashimoto , screenwriter ( died 2018 ) may 14 – june duprez , actress ( died 1984 ) may 26 – john dall , actor ( died 1971 ) june 8 – robert preston , actor , singer ( died 1987 ) june 11 – jane bryan , actress ( died 2009 ) june 26 – ellen liiger , actress ( died 1987 ) july 6 – sebastian cabot , actor ( died 1977 ) july 14 – ingmar bergman , swedish actor , writer , director ( died 2007 ) july 18 – jane frazee , singer , actress ( died 1985 ) july 26 – marjorie lord , actress ( died 2015 ) august 9 – robert aldrich , director ( died 1983 ) august 17 – evelyn ankers , actress ( died 1985 ) september – rin tin tin , canine actor ( died 1932 ) september 13 – dick haymes , actor , singer ( died 1980 ) september 21 – rand brooks , actor ( died 2003 ) september 28 – arnold stang , actor and comedian ( died 2009 ) october 9 – lila kedrova , russian-born actress ( died 2000 ) october 13 – robert walker , actor ( died 1951 ) october 17 – rita hayworth , actress ( died 1987 ) october 27 – teresa wright , actress ( died 2005 ) october 29 – diana serra cary , born peggy-jean montgomery ( '' baby peggy '' ) , child silent film actress ( died 2020 ) november 4 art carney , actor ( died 2003 ) cameron mitchell , actor ( died 1994 ) november 30 – efrem zimbalist jr . , actor ( died 2014 ) december 15 – jeff chandler , actor ( died 1961 ) . deaths . january 8 – johannes pääsuke , 25 , estonian photographer and director ( train crash ) january 12 – simeon wiltsie , american actor february 1 – joseph kaufman , 36 , american silent film actor & director , married to film star ethel clayton february 15 – vernon castle , 30 , american dancer & writer march 13 – william courtleigh , jr . , 26 , american actor april 30 – '' mother '' mary maurice , 73 , american veteran stage & film actress may 19 – s . rankin drew , 26 , american actor and director . june 29 – john van den broek , 23 , dutch cinematographer july 4 – walter stradling , 43 , british cinematographer august 12 – anna held , 46 , polish actress & singer september 21 – hal august , 28 , american actor ; brother of edwin august october 2 - edwin arden , american stage & film actor october 19 – harold lockwood , 31 , american actor october 22 – myrtle gonzalez , 27 , american actress october 22 – julian l'estrange , 38 , english actor october 28 – louise vale , american actress november 6 – william shea , 67 , scottish veteran film actor & director november 18 – wayland trask , jr . , 31 , american comedian december 6 – charles gunn , 35 , american actor december 29 – jode mullally , 32 , american actor . debuts . warner baxter – all woman ( uncredited ) noël coward – hearts of the world neil hamilton – the beloved impostor ( 1918 film ) buck jones – western blood ( as buck gebhardt ) ben lyon – the transgressor irene rich – a desert wooing will rogers – laughing bill hyde . references .