The Night of the Meek (The Twilight Zone, 1959)

introductory scene/opening narration . as snow begins to fall , a drunk henry corwin , wearing his santa claus suit , stumbles and half-falls at a curbside lamppost . he is approached by two tenement children pleading for toys , a christmas dinner and '' a job for my daddy '' . as corwin begins to sob , the camera pans to rod serling standing on the sidewalk , wearing a winter coat and scarf : . plot . it is christmas eve . henry corwin , a down-and-out ne'er-do-well , dressed in a baggy , worn-out santa claus suit , has just spent his last few dollars on a sandwich and six drinks at the neighborhood bar . while bruce , the bartender , is on the phone , he sees corwin reaching for the bottle , stops and throws him out . corwin arrives for his seasonal job as a department-store santa , an hour late and obviously drunk . when customers complain , dundee , the manager , fires him and orders him off the premises . corwin says that he drinks because he lives in a '' dirty rooming house on a street filled with hungry kids and shabby people '' , for whom he is incapable of fulfilling his desired role as santa . he declares that if he had just one wish granted him on christmas eve , he 'd '' like to see matthew 5:5 '' . still in his outfit , he returns to the bar but is refused re-entry by bruce . stumbling into an alley , he hears sleigh bells . a cat knocks down a large burlap bag full of empty cans ; but when he trips over it , it is now filled with gift-wrapped packages . as he starts giving them away , he realizes that the bag is somehow producing any item that is asked for . overjoyed at his sudden ability to fulfill dreams , corwin proceeds to hand out presents to passing children and then to derelict men attending christmas eve service at sister florence 's '' delancey street mission house '' . irritated by the disruption and outraged by corwin 's offer of a new dress , sister florence hurries outside to fetch officer flaherty , who suspects corwin of stealing the presents from his former place of employment and arrests him . at the police station , dundee reaches into the garbage bag to display some of the purportedly stolen goods , but instead finds the empty cans and a cat . angry at having his time wasted , he throws accusations of incompetence at flaherty and disbelief at corwin 's claim that the bag is supernatural . dundee challenges corwin to produce a bottle of cherry brandy , vintage 1903 . corwin reaches into the bag to hand dundee his exact request , and is set free . he continues to distribute gifts until midnight , when the bag is empty . a man named burt , whose desired pipe and smoking jacket had come from corwin 's bag , sees corwin again and points out that corwin himself has not received a gift . corwin says that if he had his choice of any gift at all , '' i think i 'd wish i could do this every year '' . returning to the alley where the gift-laden bag had presented itself , he encounters an elf sitting in a large reindeer-hauled sleigh , waiting for him . realizing that his wish has come true and he is now the real santa claus , corwin sits in the sleigh and sets off with the elf . emerging from the precinct , flaherty and dundee , now slightly tipsy from corwin 's brandy , look upward upon hearing the tinkle of bells and see corwin , in flaherty 's words , '' big as life , in a sleigh with reindeer , sittin ' next to an elf '' , ascending into the night sky . dundee invites flaherty to accompany him home and share some hot coffee , with brandy poured in it , adding , '' . and we 'll thank god for miracles , flaherty . '' . closing narration . the original narration , on december 23 , 1960 , ended with the words , '' and a merry christmas , to each and all '' , but that phrase was deleted in the 1980s and is now excluded from reruns , vhs releases and the five-dvd set the twilight zone : the definitive edition . the phrase is heard in the blu-ray release of season 2 as well as the version streamed by netflix , but with noticeably different sound quality from the rest of serling 's narration . as broadcast on the metv network on christmas day 2019 and thereafter , the last line has been restored in syndication . credits . directed by jack smight written by rod serling produced by buck houghton art carney as henry corwin john fiedler as mr . dundee robert p . lieb as flaherty val avery as the bartender meg wyllie as sister florence kay cousins as irate mother burt mustin as old man ( burt ) trains by lionel corp . reindeer furnished by santa 's village – skyforest , california . billed ( in order of appearance ) . andrea margolis ( girl pleading for '' a job for my daddy '' ) jimmy garrett ( boy pleading for '' a big turkey pot christmas dinner '' ) nan peterson ( blonde in the bar , sitting next to the sleeping drunk ) matthew mccue ( collins , one of the derelicts at the mission ) larrian gillespie ( elf ) . production . by november 1960 , the twilight zones second season had already broadcast five episodes and finished filming sixteen . however , at a cost of about 65,000 per episode , the show was exceeding its budget . as a result , six consecutive episodes were videotaped and subsequently kinescoped to 16-millimeter film for tv transmission and future syndicated rebroadcasts . '' the night of the meek '' was one of those six . total savings on editing and cinematography costs amounted to only about 30,000 for all six entries – not enough to justify the loss of depth of visual perspective , which gave those shows an appearance akin to that of stagebound live tv dramas , or even daytime soap operas which , at the time , were quickly and cheaply produced live on one or two sets . the experiment was therefore deemed a failure and never attempted again . personnel and cast with multiple twilight zone or related credits . jack smight directed three other twilight zone episodes : '' the lonely '' , '' the lateness of the hour '' , and '' twenty two '' art carney later appears as santa claus in cbs ' december 1970 hour-long muppet special , the great santa claus switch , and in abc 's december 1984 television film , the night they saved christmas ( the name of carney 's '' night of the meek '' character , henry corwin , is a tribute to serling 's idol , norman corwin ) romano , carlin , inquirer book critic . '' he was so outspoken about tv he was called its leading critic in 1961 . ( the philadelphia inquirer , february 2 , 1993 ) '' john fiedler played a bureaucratic angel in the third season 's penultimate episode , '' cavender is coming '' , a failed sitcom pilot replete with a laugh track burt mustin plays one of the residents of the old-age home in third season 's '' kick the can '' andrea margolis ' second appearance came in the following week , '' dust '' , in which she portrays estrelita , a little mexican girl nan peterson 's three other appearances are in '' walking distance '' , '' the whole truth '' , and '' from agnes—with love '' , in which , as here , she is unbilled . remake . this episode was remade into an episode of the 1980s version of the twilight zone called '' night of the meek '' , which starred richard mulligan as henry corwin and william atherton as mr . dundee there was a radio adaptation of the twilight zone episode '' the night of the meek '' which starred christopher mcdonald . see also . list of the twilight zone ( 1959 tv series ) episodes . references . sources . devoe , bill . ( 2008 ) . trivia from the twilight zone . albany , ga : bear manor media . grams , martin . ( 2008 ) . the twilight zone : unlocking the door to a television classic . churchville , md : otr publishing . external links . the night of the meek at the tv.com episode page