S-VHS

technical information . like vhs , the s-vhs format uses a color under modulation scheme . s-vhs improves luminance ( luma ) resolution by increasing luminance bandwidth . increased bandwidth is possible because of increased luminance carrier from 3.4 & nbsp ; megahertz ( mhz ) to 5.4 & nbsp ; mhz . notice also that the luminance modulator bandwidth is increased : in contrast to standard vhs ' frequencies of 3.8 mhz ( synch tip ) to 4.8 mhz ( peak white ) , s-vhs uses 5.4 mhz synch tip and 7.4 mhz peak white . increased luminance bandwidth produces a 60 % improvement in ( luminance ) picture detail , or a horizontal resolution of 420 vertical lines per picture height – versus vhs 's 240 lines . the often quoted horizontal resolution of '' over 400 '' means s-vhs captures greater picture detail than even ntsc analog cable and broadcast tv , which is limited to about 330 television lines ( tvl ) . in practice , when time shifting tv programs on s-vhs equipment , the improvement over vhs is quite noticeable . yet , the trained eye can easily spot the difference between live television and a s-vhs recording of it . this is because s-vhs does not improve other key aspects of the video signal , particularly the chrominance ( chroma ) signal . in vhs , the chroma carrier is both severely bandlimited and rather noisy , a limitation that s-vhs does not address . poor color resolution was a deficiency shared by s-vhs 's contemporaries , such as hi8 and ed-beta – all of which were limited to 0.4 & nbsp ; megahertz or 30 & nbsp ; tvl resolution . regarding audio recording , s-vhs retains vhs 's conventional linear ( baseband ) and high fidelity ( hi-fi ) – audio frequency modulation ( afm ) soundtracks . some professional s-vhs decks can record a pulse-code modulation ( pcm ) digital audio track ( stereo 48 & nbsp ; khz ) , along with the normal video and hi-fi stereo and mono analog audio . as an added bonus , due to the increased bandwidth of s-vhs , teletext data ( pal ) signals can be recorded along with the normal video signal . as a result , this teletext data is also able to be decoded and displayed on-screen as an overlay of the conventional tv picture ( though not on standard vhs machines ) . a suitably teletext-equipped receiver/decoder ( tv , pc card , etc . ) displays the recorded teletext data information as if the video were being viewed as a real-time live broadcast . hardware . s-vhs video cassette recorders ( vcrs ) and cassette tapes are nearly identical in appearance and operation , and backward compatible with vhs . older vhs vcrs can not play back s-vhs recordings at all , but can record onto an s-vhs tape in the basic vhs format . newer vhs vcrs , depending upon their specification , offered a feature called s-vhs quasi-playback or super quasi-play back , abbreviated to sqpb . sqpb lets basic vhs players view ( but not record ) s-vhs recordings , though reduced to the lesser vhs quality . this feature is useful for viewing s-vhs camcorder recordings which used either the full-size s-vhs videotape cassette or the smaller vhs-c videotape cassette . later model s-vhs vcrs offered a recording option called s-vhs et , which allowed svhs vcrs to record on vhs tape . s-vhs et is a further modification of the vhs standards that permitted near s-vhs quality recordings on more common and less expensive basic vhs tapes . s-vhs et recordings can be viewed on most sqpb-equipped vhs vcrs and s-vhs vcrs . to get the most benefit from s-vhs , a direct video connection to the monitor or tv is required , ideally via an s-video connectors and/or s-video enabled scart . media . in order to take advantage of the enhanced capabilities of the s-vhs system , i.e . , for the best recordings and playback , an s-vhs vcr requires s-vhs video tape cassettes . these have a different oxide media formulation for higher magnetic coercivity . s-vhs video cassettes are sensed and identified by the video cassette recorder via a specific internal profile within a hole in the underside of the s-vhs video cassette body . videophiles were the first to theorize that since the only distinguishing feature of an s-vhs tape is a small 3 & nbsp ; mm hole on the underside of the video cassette , it should be possible to use more common and inexpensive vhs tapes by duplicating that hole . however , s-vhs cassettes also contain a higher grade and coercivity of tape stock to effectively record the higher video bandwidth offered by s-vhs . s-vhs tapes are compatible with vhs vcrs , but an svhs recording will not playback properly . s-vhs et . jvc also introduced an s-vhs et ( super-vhs expansion technology ) system on its s-vhs consumer decks , allowing the use of normal vhs tapes for s-vhs recording , by slightly modifying the s-vhs recording specs while still retaining compatibility so that s-vhs et tapes could be played with non-et s-vhs vcrs . technically , in s-vhs et mode , the recording circuit is altered with : change of the w/d clip level ( reducing the white clip level from 210 % in svhs to 190 % in svhs et ) change of the main emphasis characteristics ( changing the frequency responses ) change of the recording level ( y and c ) and recording current jvc video technical guide - video cassette recorder - hr-s9500 ntsc/pal/secam , march 1999 - retrieved from ( members only ) on january 9 , 2016 . limited success . despite its designation as the logical successor to vhs , s-vhs did not come close to replacing vhs . in the home market , s-vhs failed to gain significant market share . for various reasons , consumers were not interested in paying more for an improved picture . likewise , s-vhs rentals and movie sales did very poorly . a few pre-recorded movies were released to s-vhs , but poor market acceptance prompted studios to transition their high-end product from s-vhs to laserdisc , and then onto dvd . in the camcorder role , the smaller form s-vhs-c camcorder enjoyed limited success among home video users . it was more popular for the amateur video industry , as it allowed for at least second generation copies at reasonable quality ( necessary for editing ) . jvc , panasonic , and sony have sold industrial s-vhs decks for amateur and semi-professional production use . some public-access television stations and other low-budget cable tv venues used the s-vhs format , both for acquisition and subsequent studio editing , but the network studios largely avoided s-vhs , as descendants of the more expensive betacam format had already become a de facto standard . s-vhs-c competed directly with hi8 , the latter offering smaller cassettes , longer running time , and ultimately selling much better . a number of colleges and universities also used s-vhs as a teaching tool for students , as the tapes cost less and offered more recording time than betacam sp tapes , and yet students could still be trained on professional-level equipment . in the us a number of local access tv stations , and in canada local cable channels used s-vhs in the 1990s to record and playback local programs , such as city councils and christmas parades . for most of these stations , while the u-matics that they had been using were being phased out , but digital video was still years away , s-vhs was used to record from the composite setups that were still in place for u-matic production . , consumer s-vhs vcrs were still available , but difficult to find in retail outlets . the largest vcr manufacturers , such as matsushita ( panasonic ) and mitsubishi , gradually moved to dvd recorders , and hard-disk based digital video recorders ( dvrs ) . combination dvd/vcr units rarely offered s-vhs format standard , only vhs . in the mainstream consumer camcorder market , dv , dvd , and—eventually—solid state memory-based camcorders replaced s-vhs-c camcorders . digital camcorders generally outperform s-vhs-c units in most technical aspects : audio/video quality , recording time , lossless duplication , and form-factor . the videotapes themselves are available , mostly by mail order or online , but are vanishingly rare in retail channels , and substantially more expensive than high-quality standard vhs media . s-vhs vs ed-beta . shortly after the announcement of s-vhs , sony responded with an announcement of extended definition betamax ( ed-beta ) . s-vhs was jvc 's next generation video format designed to dominate the competing superbetamax format ( which already offered better-than-vhs quality ) . not to be outdone , sony developed ed-beta as their next generation competitor to s-vhs . in terms of video performance , ed-beta offered even greater luminance bandwidth than s-vhs – 500 television lines ( tvl ) of horizontal resolution per picture height , versus s-vhs 's or laserdisc 's 420 tvl ; putting ed-beta nearly on par with professional digital video formats ( 520 tvl ) . however , chroma performance was far less spectacular , as neither s-vhs nor ed-beta exceeded 0.4 megahertz or ~30 tvl maximum , whereas ntsc broadcast has a chroma resolution of ~120 tvl , and dvd has a chroma resolution of ~240 tvl . s-vhs was used in some tv stations for inexpensive '' on the spot '' camcorder capture of breaking news , however it was not suitable for multi-generational ( studio ) use . in terms of audio performance , both vhs and beta offered analog hi-fi stereo of outstanding quality . rather than re-invent the wheel , both s-vhs and ed-beta re-used the afm schemes of their predecessors without change . professional s-vhs decks did offer digital pcm audio , a feature not matched by ed-beta decks . in pal markets , depth multiplexing was used for both formats . in the u.s . market , the mainstream consumer market had largely ignored the release of s-vhs . with the betamax market already in sharp decline , a '' format war '' for the next generation of video simply did not materialize . sony discontinued the ed-beta product line in the u.s . market after less than two years , handing s-vhs a victory by default , if it can even be called that . ( vhs decks continued to outsell s-vhs decks until the end of the vcr product life cycle . ) there is anecdotal evidence that some tv stations purchased ed-beta equipment as a low-cost alternative to professional betacam equipment , prompting speculation that sony 's management took steps to prevent its consumer ( ed-beta ) division from cannibalizing the sales of its more lucrative professional video division . nevertheless , it is clear to all that by the time of ed-beta 's introduction , vhs had already won a decisive victory , and no amount of competition on behalf of ed-beta could regain the home video market . home use . getting the most benefit from s-vhs required a direct video connection to the monitor , ideally via an s-video connection . however , older television sets lacked s-video or even any av inputs . nevertheless , viewing an s-vhs recording through a vcr 's built-in rf modulator yields a discernible quality improvement over vhs . it is not unusual to see the term s-vhs incorrectly used to refer to s-video connectors ( also called y/c connectors ) , even in printed material . this may be due to s-vhs having been one of the more common consumer video products equipped with the s-video connector . however , s-video connectors became common on many other video devices : dvd players and recorders , minidv and hi8 camcorders , cable/satellite set-top boxes , tv-compatible video outputs on computers and video game consoles , and inputs on tv sets themselves . where the s- in s-vhs means '' super '' , the s- in s-video refers to the '' separated '' luminance and chrominance signals . use for digital audio . in 1991 , alesis introduced adat , an eight-track digital audio recording system that used s-vhs cassettes . an adat machine recorded eight tracks of uncompressed audio material in 16-bit ( later 20-bit ) resolution . the recording time was one-third of the cassette 's nominal playing time , e.g . , a 120 min s-vhs cassette held 40 minutes of eight-track audio . studer produced the v-eight ( manufuctured and sold by alesis as the m20 ) and the v-twenty-four digital multitrack recorders . these used s-vhs cassettes for 8-track and 24-track digital audio recording , at a significantly lower cost than their dash reel-to-reel digital recorders . the videotape transports were made for studer by matsushita . see also . d-vhs w-vhs video 2000 . references . external links . tape loading mechanism s-vhs vtr telefunken a1200 — youtube.com video tape loading mechanism s-vhs vtr panasonic ag-4700 — youtube.com video tape loading mechanism / dynamic drum s-vhs vtr jvc hr-s9500 — youtube.com video formats — high-techproductions.com s-vhs ( 1987 ) — videointerchange.com tvr formats — labguysworld.com analog video recording — danalee.ca