Protein production

protein production systems . commonly used protein production systems include those derived from bacteria , yeast , baculovirus/insect , mammalian cells , and more recently filamentous fungi such as myceliophthora thermophila . when biopharmaceuticals are produced with one of these systems , process-related impurities termed host cell proteins also arrive in the final product in trace amounts . . cell-based systems . the oldest and most widely used expression systems are cell-based and may be defined as the '' combination of an expression vector , its cloned dna , and the host for the vector that provide a context to allow foreign gene function in a host cell , that is , produce proteins at a high level '' . overexpression is an abnormally and excessively high level of gene expression which produces a pronounced gene-related phenotype . there are many ways to introduce foreign dna to a cell for expression , and many different host cells may be used for expression — each expression system has distinct advantages and liabilities . expression systems are normally referred to by the host and the dna source or the delivery mechanism for the genetic material . for example , common hosts are bacteria ( such as e.coli , b . subtilis ) , yeast ( such as s.cerevisiae ) or eukaryotic cell lines . common dna sources and delivery mechanisms are viruses ( such as baculovirus , retrovirus , adenovirus ) , plasmids , artificial chromosomes and bacteriophage ( such as lambda ) . the best expression system depends on the gene involved , for example the saccharomyces cerevisiae is often preferred for proteins that require significant posttranslational modification . insect or mammal cell lines are used when human-like splicing of mrna is required . nonetheless , bacterial expression has the advantage of easily producing large amounts of protein , which is required for x-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance experiments for structure determination . because bacteria are prokaryotes , they are not equipped with the full enzymatic machinery to accomplish the required post-translational modifications or molecular folding . hence , multi-domain eukaryotic proteins expressed in bacteria often are non-functional . also , many proteins become insoluble as inclusion bodies that are difficult to recover without harsh denaturants and subsequent cumbersome protein-refolding . to address these concerns , expressions systems using multiple eukaryotic cells were developed for applications requiring the proteins be conformed as in , or closer to eukaryotic organisms : cells of plants ( i.e . tobacco ) , of insects or mammalians ( i.e . bovines ) are transfected with genes and cultured in suspension and even as tissues or whole organisms , to produce fully folded proteins . mammalian in vivo expression systems have however low yield and other limitations ( time-consuming , toxicity to host cells , . ) . to combine the high yield/productivity and scalable protein features of bacteria and yeast , and advanced epigenetic features of plants , insects and mammalians systems , other protein production systems are developed using unicellular eukaryotes ( i.e . non-pathogenic ' leishmania ' cells ) . bacterial systems . escherichia coli . e . coli is one of the most widely used expression hosts , and dna is normally introduced in a plasmid expression vector . the techniques for overexpression in e . coli are well developed and work by increasing the number of copies of the gene or increasing the binding strength of the promoter region so assisting transcription . for example , a dna sequence for a protein of interest could be cloned or subcloned into a high copy-number plasmid containing the lac ( often lacuv5 ) promoter , which is then transformed into the bacterium e . coli . addition of iptg ( a lactose analog ) activates the lac promoter and causes the bacteria to express the protein of interest . e . coli strain bl21 and bl21 ( de3 ) are two strains commonly used for protein production . as members of the b lineage , they lack lon and ompt proteases , protecting the produced proteins from degradation . the de3 prophage found in bl21 ( de3 ) provides t7 rna polymerase ( driven by the lacuv5 promoter ) , allowing for vectors with the t7 promoter to be used instead . . corynebacterium . non-pathogenic species of the gram-positive corynebacterium are used for the commercial production of various amino acids . the c . glutamicum species is widely used for producing glutamate and lysine , components of human food , animal feed and pharmaceutical products . expression of functionally active human epidermal growth factor has been done in c . glutamicum , thus demonstrating a potential for industrial-scale production of human proteins . expressed proteins can be targeted for secretion through either the general , secretory pathway ( sec ) or the twin-arginine translocation pathway ( tat ) . unlike gram-negative bacteria , the gram-positive corynebacterium lack lipopolysaccharides that function as antigenic endotoxins in humans . pseudomonas fluorescens . the non-pathogenic and gram-negative bacteria , pseudomonas fluorescens , is used for high level production of recombinant proteins ; commonly for the development bio-therapeutics and vaccines . p . fluorescens is a metabolically versatile organism , allowing for high throughput screening and rapid development of complex proteins . p . fluorescens is most well known for its ability to rapid and successfully produce high titers of active , soluble protein . . eukaryotic systems . yeasts . expression systems using either s . cerevisiae or pichia pastoris allow stable and lasting production of proteins that are processed similarly to mammalian cells , at high yield , in chemically defined media of proteins . filamentous fungi . filamentous fungi , especially aspergillus and trichoderma , but also more recently myceliophthora thermophila c1 have been developed into expression platforms for screening and production of diverse industrial enzymes . the expression system c1 shows a low viscosity morphology in submerged culture , enabling the use of complex growth and production media . baculovirus-infected cells . baculovirus-infected insect cells ( sf9 , sf21 , high five strains ) or mammalian cells ( hela , hek 293 ) allow production of glycosylated or membrane proteins that can not be produced using fungal or bacterial systems . it is useful for production of proteins in high quantity . genes are not expressed continuously because infected host cells eventually lyse and die during each infection cycle . . non-lytic insect cell expression . non-lytic insect cell expression is an alternative to the lytic baculovirus expression system . in non-lytic expression , vectors are transiently or stably transfected into the chromosomal dna of insect cells for subsequent gene expression . this is followed by selection and screening of recombinant clones . the non-lytic system has been used to give higher protein yield and quicker expression of recombinant genes compared to baculovirus-infected cell expression . cell lines used for this system include : sf9 , sf21 from spodoptera frugiperda cells , hi-5 from cabbage looper cells , and schneider 2 cells and schneider 3 cells from drosophila melanogaster cells . with this system , cells do not lyse and several cultivation modes can be used . additionally , protein production runs are reproducible . this system gives a homogeneous product . a drawback of this system is the requirement of an additional screening step for selecting viable clones . . excavata . leishmania tarentolae ( can not infect mammals ) expression systems allow stable and lasting production of proteins at high yield , in chemically defined media . produced proteins exhibit fully eukaryotic post-translational modifications , including glycosylation and disulfide bond formation . mammalian systems . the most common mammalian expression systems are chinese hamster ovary ( cho ) and human embryonic kidney ( hek ) cells . chinese hamster ovary cell mouse myeloma lymphoblast ( e.g . ns0 cell ) fully human human embryonic kidney cells ( hek-293 ) human embryonic retinal cells ( crucell 's per.c6 ) human amniocyte cells ( glycotope and cevec ) . cell-free systems . cell-free production of proteins is performed in vitro using purified rna polymerase , ribosomes , trna and ribonucleotides . these reagents may be produced by extraction from cells or from a cell-based expression system . due to the low expression levels and high cost of cell-free systems , cell-based systems are more widely used .