Joseph Justus Scaliger

biography . early life . scaliger was born at agen , the tenth child and third son of italian scholar julius caesar scaliger and andiette de roques lobejac . when he was twelve years old , he was sent with two younger brothers to the college of guienne in bordeaux , which was then under the direction of jean gelida . an outbreak of the plague in 1555 caused the boys to return home , and for the next few years joseph was his father 's constant companion and amanuensis . the composition of latin verse was the chief amusement of his father julius in his later years , and he would daily dictate to his son between eighty and a hundred lines , and sometimes even more . joseph was also required each day to write a latin theme or declamation , though in other respects he seems to have been left to his own devices . he learned from his father to be not only a scholar , but also an acute observer , aiming at historical criticism more than at correcting texts . university and travels . after his father 's death he spent four years at the university of paris , where he began the study of greek under adrianus turnebus . but after two months he found he was not in a position to profit from the lectures of the greatest greek scholar of the time . he read homer in twenty-one days , and then went through all the other greek poets , orators and historians , forming a grammar for himself as he went along . from greek , at the suggestion of guillaume postel , he proceeded to attack hebrew , and then arabic ; of both he acquired a respectable knowledge . his most important teacher was jean dorat . he was able not only to impart knowledge , but also to kindle enthusiasm in scaliger . it was to dorat that scaliger owed his home for the next thirty years of his life , for in 1563 the professor recommended him to louis de chastaigner , the young lord of la roche-posay , as a companion in his travels . a close friendship sprang up between the two young men , which remained unbroken till the death of louis in 1595 . the travellers first went to rome . here they found muretus , who , when at bordeaux and toulouse , had been a great favourite and occasional visitor of julius caesar scaliger at agen . muret soon recognized the young scaliger 's merits , and introduced him to many contacts well worth knowing . after visiting a large part of italy , the travellers moved on to england and scotland , passing as it would seem la roche-posay on their way . scaliger 's preface to his first book , the conjectanea in varronem , is dated there in december 1564 . scaliger formed an unfavourable opinion of the english . their inhuman disposition and inhospitable treatment of foreigners especially made a negative impression on him . he was also disappointed in finding only a few greek manuscripts and few learned men . it was not until a much later period that he became intimate with richard thomson and other englishmen . in the course of his travels he had become a protestant . . france , geneva and france . on his return to france he spent three years with the chastaigners , accompanying them to their different châteaux in poitou , as the calls of the civil war required . in 1570 he accepted the invitation of jacques cujas and proceeded to valence to study jurisprudence under the greatest living jurist . here he remained three years , profiting not only by the lectures but even more by the library of cujas , which filled no fewer than seven or eight rooms and included five hundred manuscripts . the massacre of st bartholomew — occurring as he was about to accompany the jean de montluc on an embassy to poland — made scaliger flee , together with other huguenots , for geneva , where he was appointed a professor in the academy . he lectured on the organon of aristotle and the de finibus of cicero to much satisfaction for the students , but not appreciating it himself . he hated lecturing , and was bored with the importunities of the fanatical preachers ; and in 1574 he returned to france and made his home for the next twenty years with chastaigner . of his life during this period we have interesting details and notices in the lettres françaises inédites de joseph scaliger , edited by tamizey de larroque ( agen , 1881 ) . constantly moving through poitou and the limousin , as the exigencies of the civil war required , occasionally taking his turn as a guard , at least on one occasion trailing a pike on an expedition against the leaguers , with no access to libraries , and frequently separated even from his own books , his life during this period seems most unsuited to study . he had , however , what so few contemporary scholars possessed—leisure , and freedom from financial cares . . academic output . it was during this period of his life that he composed and published his books of historical criticism . his editions of the catalecta ( 1575 ) , of festus ( 1575 ) , of catullus , tibullus and propertius ( 1577 ) , are the work of a man determined to discover the real meaning and force of his author . he was the first to lay down and apply sound rules of criticism and emendation , and to change textual criticism from a series of haphazard guesses into a '' rational procedure subject to fixed laws '' ( mark pattison ) . but these works , while proving scaliger 's right to the foremost place among his contemporaries as latin scholar and critic , did not go beyond mere scholarship . it was reserved for his edition of manilius ( 1579 ) , and his de emendatione temporum ( 1583 ) , to revolutionize perceived ideas of ancient chronology—to show that ancient history is not confined to that of the greeks and romans , but also comprises that of the persians , the babylonians and the egyptians , hitherto neglected , and that of the jews , hitherto treated as a thing apart ; and that the historical narratives and fragments of each of these , and their several systems of chronology , must be critically compared . it was this innovation that distinguished scaliger from contemporary scholars . neither they nor those who immediately followed seem to have appreciated his innovation . instead , they valued his emendatory criticism and his skill in greek . his commentary on manilius is really a treatise on ancient astronomy , and it forms an introduction to de emendatione temporum ; in this work scaliger investigates ancient systems of determining epochs , calendars and computations of time . applying the work of nicolaus copernicus and other modern scientists , he reveals the principles behind these systems . in the remaining twenty-four years of his life he expanded on his work in the de emendatione . he succeeded in reconstructing the lost chronicle of eusebius—one of the most valuable ancient documents , especially valuable for ancient chronology . this he printed in 1606 in his thesaurus temporum , in which he collected , restored , and arranged every chronological relic extant in greek or latin . . the netherlands . when in 1590 justus lipsius retired from the university of leiden , the university and its protectors , the states-general of the netherlands and the prince of orange , resolved to appoint scaliger his successor . he declined ; he hated lecturing , and there were those among his friends who erroneously believed that with the success of henry iv learning would flourish , and protestantism would be no barrier to his advancement . the invitation was renewed in the most flattering manner a year later ; the invitation stated scaliger would not be required to lecture , and that the university wished only for his presence , while he would be able to dispose of his own time in all respects . this offer scaliger accepted provisionally . midway through 1593 he set out for the netherlands , where he would pass the remaining sixteen years of his life , never returning to france . his reception at leiden was all that he could have wished for . he received a handsome income ; he was treated with the highest consideration . his supposed rank as a prince of verona ( a sensitive issue for the scaligeri ; see below ) was recognized . leiden lying between the hague and amsterdam , scaliger was able to enjoy , besides the learned circle of leiden , the advantages of the best society of both these capitals . for scaliger was no hermit buried among his books ; he was fond of social intercourse and was himself a good talker . during the first seven years of his residence at leiden his reputation was at its highest point . his literary judgement was unquestioned . from his throne at leiden he ruled the learned world ; a word from him could make or mar a rising reputation , and he was surrounded by young men eager to listen to and profit from his conversation . he encouraged grotius when only a youth of sixteen to edit capella . at the early death of the younger douza he wept as at that of a beloved son . daniel heinsius , at first his favourite pupil , became his most intimate friend . at the same time , scaliger had made numerous enemies . he hated ignorance , but he hated still more half-learning , and most of all dishonesty in argument or in quotation . himself the soul of honour and truthfulness , he had no toleration for the disingenuous argument and the misstatements of facts of those who wrote to support a theory or to defend an unsound cause . his pungent sarcasm soon reached the ears of the persons who were its object , and his pen was not less bitter than his tongue . he was conscious of his power , and not always sufficiently cautious or sufficiently gentle in its exercise . nor was he always right . he trusted much to his memory , which was occasionally treacherous . his emendations , if often valuable , were sometimes absurd . in laying the foundations of a science of ancient chronology he relied sometimes on groundless or even absurd hypotheses , often based on an imperfect induction of facts . sometimes he misunderstood the astronomical science of the ancients , sometimes that of copernicus and tycho brahe . and he was no mathematician . . scaliger vs . the jesuits . but his enemies were not merely those whose errors he had exposed and whose hostility he had excited by the violence of his language . the results of his method of historical criticism threatened the catholic controversialists and the authenticity of many of the documents on which they relied . the jesuits , who aspired to be the source of all scholarship and criticism , saw the writings and authority of scaliger as a formidable barrier to their claims . muret in the latter part of his life professed the strictest orthodoxy , lipsius had been reconciled to the church of rome , isaac casaubon was supposed to be wavering , but scaliger was known to be an irreconcilable protestant . as long as his intellectual supremacy was unquestioned , the protestants had the advantage in learning and scholarship . his enemies therefore aimed , if not to answer his criticisms or to disprove his statements , yet to attack him as a man and to destroy his reputation . this was no easy task , for his moral character was absolutely spotless . . veronese descent . thumb after several attacks purportedly by the jesuits , in 1607 a new attempt was made . in 1594 scaliger had published his epistola de vetustate et splendore gentis scaligerae et jc scaligeri vita . in 1601 gaspar scioppius , then in the service of the jesuits published his scaliger hypobolimaeus ( '' the supposititious scaliger '' ) , a quarto volume of more than four hundred pages . the author purports to point out five hundred lies in the epistola de vetustate of scaliger , but the main argument of the book is to show the falsity of his pretensions to be of the family of la scala , and of the narrative of his father 's early life . '' no stronger proof , '' says pattison , '' can be given of the impressions produced by this powerful philippic , dedicated to the defamation of an individual , than that it had been the source from which the biography of scaliger , as it now stands in our biographical collections , has mainly flowed . '' to scaliger , the publication of scaliger hypobolimaeus was crushing . whatever his father julius had believed , joseph had never doubted himself to be a prince of verona , and in his epistola had put forth all that he had heard from his father . he wrote a reply to scioppius , entitled confutatio fabulae burdonum . in the opinion of pattison , '' as a refutation of scioppius it is most complete '' ; but there are certainly grounds for dissenting from this judgment . scaliger purported that scioppius committed more blunders than he corrected , claiming that the book made untruthful allegations ; but he did not succeed in adducing any proof either of his father 's descent from the la scala family , or of any of the events narrated by julius prior to his arrival at agen . nor does scaliger attempt a refutation of the crucial point , namely , that william , the last prince of verona , had no son nicholas , who would have been the alleged grandfather of julius . but whether complete or not , the confutatio had little success ; the attack attributed to the jesuits was successful . scioppius was wont to boast that his book had killed scaliger . the confutatio was scaliger 's last work . five months after it appeared , on 21 january 1609 , at four in the morning , he died at leiden in the arms of his pupil and friend heinsius . in his will scaliger bequeathed his renowned collection of manuscripts and books ( tous mes livres de langues étrangères , hebraiques , syriens , arabiques , ethiopiens ) to leiden university library . sources . one substantial biography of joseph scaliger is that of jakob bernays ( berlin , 1855 ) . it was reviewed by pattison in the quarterly review , vol . cviii ( 1860 ) , since reprinted in the essays , i ( 1889 ) , 132–195 . pattison had made many manuscript collections for a life of joseph scaliger on a much more extensive scale , which he left unfinished . in writing the above article , professor christie had access to and made much use of these manuscripts , which include a life of julius caesar scaliger . the fragments of the life of joseph scaliger have been printed in the essays , i . 196–245 . for the life of joseph , besides the letters published by tamizis de larroque ( agen , 1881 ) , the two old collections of latin and french letters and the two scaligerana are the most important sources of information . the complete correspondence of scaliger is now available in eight volumes . the correspondence of joseph justus scaliger , 8 vol . ; ed . by paul botley and dirk van miert . supervisory editors anthony grafton , henk jan de jonge and jill kraye . genève : droz , 2012 . ( travaux d'humanisme et renaissance ; 507 ) . for the life of julius caesar , the letters edited by his son , those subsequently published in 1620 by the president de maussac , the scaligerana , and his own writings are full of autobiographical matter , are the chief authorities . jules de bourousse de laffore 's etude sur jules césar de lescale ( agen , 1860 ) and adolphe magen 's documents sur julius caesar scaliger et sa famille ( agen , 1873 ) add important details for the lives of both father and son . the lives by charles nisard—that of julius et les gladiateurs de la république des lettres , and that of joseph le triumvirat littéraire au seizième siècle—are equally unworthy of their author and their subjects . julius is simply held up to ridicule , while the life of joseph is almost wholly based on the book of scioppius and the scaligerana . a complete list of the works of joseph will be found in his life by jakob bernays . see also j . e . sandys , history of classical scholarship , ii . ( 1908 ) , 199–204 . a technical biography is anthony t . grafton , joseph scaliger : a study in the history of classical scholarship , 2 vol . ( oxford , oxford university press , 1983 , 1993 ) . see also . history of scholarship julian period – a tricyclic system of years proposed by scaliger new chronology ( fomenko ) . references . external links . correspondents of scaliger : joseph justus scaliger maintained a vast correspondence with european humanists and scholars , whose names are listed here the correspondence of joseph justus scaliger in emlo