August Hermann Francke

biography . born in lübeck , francke was educated at the illustrious gymnasium in gotha before he studied at the universities of erfurt and kiel — where he came under the influence of the pietism christian kortholt — and finally leipzig . during his student career he made a special study of hebrew and greek ; and in order to learn hebrew more thoroughly , he for some time put himself under the instructions of ezra edzardi at hamburg . he graduated at leipzig , where in 1685 he became a privatdozent . a year later , by the help of his friend p . anton , and with the approval and encouragement of philipp jakob spener , he founded the collegium philobiblicum , at which a number of graduates met regularly for the systematic study of the bible , philologically and practically . he next spent some months at lüneburg as assistant or curate to the learned superintendent , k . h . sandhagen , and there his religious beliefs deepened . on leaving lüneburg he spent some time in hamburg , where he became a teacher in a private school , and made the acquaintance of nikolaus lange . after a long visit to spener , at that time a court preacher in dresden , francke returned to leipzig in the spring of 1689 , and began to give bible lectures of an exegetical and practical kind , at the same time resuming the collegium philobiblicum of earlier days . he soon became popular as a lecturer ; but the peculiarities of his teaching almost immediately aroused a violent opposition on the part of the university authorities ; and before the end of the year he was interdicted from lecturing on the ground of his alleged pietism . that was how francke 's name first came to be publicly associated with that of spener , and with pietism . prohibited from lecturing in leipzig , francke in 1690 found work at erfurt as '' deacon '' of one of the city churches . here his evangelistic fervour attracted multitudes to his preaching , including roman catholics , but at the same time excited the anger of his opponents ; and the result of their opposition was that after a ministry of fifteen months he was commanded by the civil authorities ( 27 september 1691 ) to leave erfurt within forty-eight hours . that same year spener was expelled from dresden . in december , through spener 's influence , francke accepted an invitation to fill the chair of greek and oriental languages in the new university of halle , which was at that time being organized by the elector frederick i of prussia ; and at the same time , the chair having no salary attached to it , he was appointed pastor of glaucha in the immediate neighbourhood of the town . he afterwards became professor of theology . here , for the remaining thirty-six years of his life , he discharged the twofold office of pastor and professor with energy and success . at the very outset of his labours , he had been profoundly impressed with a sense of his responsibility towards the numerous outcast children who were growing up around him in ignorance and crime . after a number of tentative plans , he resolved in 1695 to institute what is often called a '' ragged school , '' supported by public charity . a single room was at first sufficient , but within a year it was found necessary to purchase a house , to which another was added in 1697 . in 1698 , there were 100 orphans under his charge to be clothed and fed , besides 500 children who were taught as day scholars . the schools grew in importance and were later known as the franckesche stiftungen . the education given was strictly religious . hebrew was included , while the greek and latin classics were neglected ; the homilies of macarius took the place of thucydides . a chemist , whom francke had visited on his deathbed , bequeathed to him the recipe for compounding certain medicines , which afterwards yielded an annual income of more than 20,000 , and made the institution independent . shortly after its founding , the institution comprised an orphan asylum , a latin school , a german ( or burgher ) school , and a seminary for training teachers for these establishments . although francke 's principal aim was religious instruction , he also taught natural science and physical education and manual trades . he ran an apothecary 's shop and , having assisted his friend carl hildebrand von canstein in founding the first modern bible society , a printing press for publishing cheap copies of the bible for mass distribution . at the time of francke 's death , the schools were frequented by more than 2,300 pupils . francke 's schools provided a prototype which greatly influenced later german education . in his university teaching as well , he gave great emphasis to religion . even as professor of greek , he had given great prominence in his lectures to the study of the scriptures ; but he found a much more congenial sphere when , in 1698 , he was appointed to the chair of theology . yet his first courses of lectures in that department were readings and expositions of the old and new testament ; and to this , as also to hermeneutics , he always attached special importance , believing that for theology a sound exegesis was the one indispensable requisite . '' theologus nascitur in scripturis , '' he used to say ; but during his occupancy of the theological chair he lectured at various times upon other branches of theology also . amongst his colleagues were paul anton , joachim j . breithaupt , joachim lange and johann juncker—men who shared his beliefs . through their influence upon the students , halle became a centre from which pietism became very widely diffused over germany . under francke 's influence , christian missionary efforts were greatly enhanced , zeal was aroused and recruits for christian missions were gained , and halle also became the centre for danish-halle mission to india . . works . francke 's principal contributions to theological literature were : ( 1693 ) ; ( 1717 ) ; ( 1724 ) ; and ( 1726-1736 ) . the manuductio was translated into english in 1813 , under the title a guide to the reading and study of the holy scriptures . an account of his orphanage , entitled , ( 1709 ) , which subsequently passed through several editions , has also been partially translated , under the title the footsteps of divine providence , or , the bountiful hand of heaven defraying the expenses of faith . francke , august hermann ( 1704 ) : august hermann franckes schrift über eine reform des erziehungs- und bildungswesens als ausgangspunkt einer geistlichen und sozialen neuordnung der evangelischen kirche des 18 . jahrhunderts : der grosse aufsatz . mit einer quellenkundlichen einführung . hrsg . v . otto podczeck . berlin . akademie 1962 . notes . references . . brigitte klosterberg : '' the “ mission archives ” in the archives of the francke foundations in halle . '' in : mida archival reflexicon ( 2020 ) , issn 2628-5029 , 9 pp . attribution . further reading . sattler , gary r . ( 1982 ) . god 's glory , neighbor 's good : a brief introduction to the life and writings of august hermann francke . chicago : covenant press . yoder , peter james ( 2020 ) . pietism and the sacraments : the life and theology of august hermann francke . university park : pennsylvania state university press . external links . augustus hermann francke christ the sum and substance of all the holy scriptures , in the old and new testament published 1732 augustus hermann francke nicodemus , or , a treatise against the fear of man published 1831 augustus hermann francke a guide to the reading and study of the holy scriptures published 1823 heinrich ernst ferdinand guericke , 1803-1878 life of augustus herman franke published 1847 memoirs of augustus hermann francke by american sunday-school union 1831