1937 in literature

events . january 9 – the first issue of look magazine goes on sale in the united states . january 19 – bbc television broadcasts the underground murder mystery by j . bissell thomas from london , the first play to be written for television . february 6 – john steinbeck 's novella of the great depression , of mice and men , appears in the united states . april – the irish writers elizabeth bowen and seán ó faoláin first meet , in london . may 14 – bbc television broadcasts a 30-minute excerpt of twelfth night , the first known television broadcast of a shakespeare piece . the cast includes peggy ashcroft and greer garson . may 21 – penguin books in the u.k . launches pelican books , a sixpenny paperback non-fiction imprint , with a two-volume edition of george bernard shaw 's the intelligent woman 's guide to socialism and capitalism . june the british science fiction magazine tales of wonder first appears . john cowper powys visits sycharth , birthplace of owain glyndŵr , which inspires his 1940 novel owen glendower . june 30 – the new england quarterly prints poems by a colonial american pastor , edward taylor ( died 1729 ) , discovered by thomas h . johnson . library of congress , catalog of copyright entries : periodicals , part 2 . accessed 23 february 2015 . summer – american-born writer thomas quinn curtiss meets german-born novelist klaus mann in europe and they start a relationship . july buchenwald concentration camp in nazi germany is established around the goethe oak . rex ingamells and other poets initiate the jindyworobak movement in australian literature , in the magazine venture . the american academic librarian randolph greenfield adams writes a controversial library quarterly essay , '' librarians as enemies of books '' , complaining of librarians downgrading books and scholarship in favor of other tasks . july 4 – the lost colony a historical drama by paul green , is first performed at an outdoor theater in the place where it is set : roanoke island , north carolina . july 31 – stephen vincent benét 's post-apocalyptic short story '' by the waters of babylon '' , inspired by april 's bombing of guernica , is published in the u.s . the saturday evening post as '' the place of the gods '' . september 10 – the soviet playwright sergei tretyakov commits suicide while under sentence of death at butyrka prison in moscow as part of the great purge . september 21 – j . r . r . tolkien 's juvenile fantasy novel the hobbit is published in england by george allen & unwin on the recommendation of young rayner unwin . september 29 – the french playwright antonin artaud is expelled from ireland . october 6 – the fictional mrs . miniver appears in a column on domestic life by jan struther for the times , london . november 11 ( armistice day ) – bbc television broadcasts journey 's end by r . c . sherriff , 1928 , set on the western front ( world war i ) in 1918 , as the first full-length television adaptation of a stage play . reginald tate plays the lead , having long performed it in the theater . unknown dates the national library of iran is inaugurated in tehran . the future novelist angus wilson becomes a book cataloguer at the british library in london . new books . fiction . felix aderca – orașele înecate ( sunken cities ) eric ambler – uncommon danger bibhutibhushan bandyopadhyay – chander pahar ( চাঁদের পাহড় , mountain of the moon ) vicki baum – love and death in bali ( liebe und tod auf bali ) georges bernanos – mouchette phyllis bottome – the mortal storm morley callaghan – more joy in heaven john dickson carr ( as carter dickson ) – the ten teacups agatha christie – hercule poirot stories death on the nile dumb witness murder in the mews stuart cloete – turning wheels murray constantine – swastika night a . j . cronin – the citadel james curtis – there ai n't no justice ludovic dauș – o jumătate de om ( half a man ) isak dinesen – out of africa pierre drieu la rochelle – rêveuse bourgeoisie lawrence durrell ( as charles norden ) – panic spring hans fallada – wolf among wolves ( wolf unter wölfen ) max frisch – an answer from the silence ( antwort aus der stille ) zona gale – light woman witold gombrowicz – ferdydurke sadegh hedayat – the blind owl ( بوف کور , boof-e koor ) ernest hemingway – to have and have not robert hichens – daniel airlie katharine hull and pamela whitlock – the far-distant oxus zora neale hurston – their eyes were watching god michael innes – hamlet , revenge ! franz kafka ( posthumously translated by willa and edwin muir ) – the trial ( first english translation of der process ) irmgard keun – after midnight ( nach mitternacht ) kalki krishnamurthy – kalvaninn kaadhali halldór laxness – ljós heimsins ( the light of the world ) – part i , heimsljós ( world light ) alexander lernet-holenia der mann im hut mona lisa meyer levin – the old bunch a . e . w . mason – the drum cameron mccabe – the face on the cutting-room floor compton mackenzie – the east wind of love ( first in the four winds of love series of six books ) w . somerset maugham – theatre r . k . narayan – the bachelor of arts elliot paul – life and death of a spanish town robert prechtl – titanic ellery queen – the door between '' kurban said '' – ali and nino ( ali und nino ) ruth sawyer – roller skates dorothy l . sayers – busman 's honeymoon bruno schulz – sanatorium under the sign of the hourglass ( sanatorium pod klepsydrą ) naoya shiga ( 志賀 直哉 ) – a dark night 's passing ( 暗夜行路 , an'ya kōro ) '' siburapha '' – behind the painting ( ข้างหลังภาพ , khang lang phap ) olaf stapledon – star maker john steinbeck – of mice and men rex stout – the red box antal szerb – journey by moonlight ( utas és holdvilág ) phoebe atwood taylor figure away octagon house beginning with a bash ( as by alice tilton ) mika waltari – a stranger came to the farm ( vieras mies tuli taloon ) charles williams – descent into hell virginia woolf – the years francis brett young portrait of a village they seek a country . children and young people . enid blyton – the wishing-chair series c . s . forester – the happy return ( also as beat to quarters ) eve garnett – the family from one end street hergé – the broken ear ( l'oreille cassée ) kornel makuszyński – argument about basia ( awantura o basię ) carola oman – robin hood arthur ransome – we did n't mean to go to sea kate seredy – the white stag dr . seuss – and to think that i saw it on mulberry street ( verse ) j . r . r . tolkien – the hobbit laura ingalls wilder – on the banks of plum creek henry winterfeld ( as manfred michael ) – timpetill – die stadt ohne eltern ( timpetill – parentless city , translated 1963 as trouble at timpetill ) . drama . bertolt brecht with margarete steffin – die gewehre der frau carrar ( adapted from j . m . synge 's señora carrar 's rifles ) karel čapek – the white disease ( bílá nemoc ) paul vincent carroll – shadow and substance jeffrey dell – blondie white ian hay – the gusher margaret kennedy – autumn arthur kober – '' having wonderful time '' robert mclellan – jamie the saxt robert morley – goodness , how sad j . b . priestley – time and the conways gerald savory – george and margaret dodie smith – bonnet over the windmill john van druten – gertie maude hella wuolijoki writing as juhani tervapää – juurakon hulda john ferguson , editor – seven famous one-act plays ( published ) . poetry . david jones – in parenthesis ( part prose ) isaac rosenberg ( killed in action 1918 ) – collected works . non-fiction . hilaire belloc – the crusades : the world 's debate alf k . berle and l . sprague de camp – inventions and their management robert byron – the road to oxiana napoleon hill – think and grow rich carl jung – dream symbols of the individuation process walter lippmann – the good society john neal — american writers : a series of papers contributed to blackwood 's magazine ( 1824-1825 ) ( edited by fred lewis pattee ) manuel chaves nogales – : es : a sangre y fuego ( fire and sword : heroes , beasts and martyrs of spain ) george orwell – the road to wigan pier eric partridge – a dictionary of slang and unconventional english . births . january 1 – john fuller , english poet january 7 – ian la frenais , english television comedy writer january 8 – leon forrest , african american novelist and essayist ( died 1997 ) january 9 – judith krantz , american novelist january 13 – jean d'costa , jamaican children 's novelist january 14 – j . bernlef , born hendrik jan marsman , dutch poet , novelist and translator ( died 2012 ) january 22 – joseph wambaugh , american mystery novelist and non-fiction writer january 23 – juan radrigán , chilean playwright ( died 2016 ) february 11 – maryse condé , guadeloupe historical fiction writer february 20 – george leonardos , greek journalist and novelist february 21 – jilly cooper , english novelist and journalist february 27 – peter hamm , german poet , author , journalist , editor and literary critic ( died 2019 ) march 14 – jan karon ( janice wilson ) , american novelist and children 's writer march 15 – valentin rasputin , russian writer ( died 2015 ) april 10 – bella akhmadulina , russian poet ( died 2010 ) april 29 – jill paton walsh ( gillian bliss ) , english novelist ( died 2020 ) may 8 – thomas pynchon , american novelist may 13 roch carrier , canadian novelist and short-story writer roger zelazny , american writer of fantasy and science fiction ( died 1995 ) june 1 – colleen mccullough , australian novelist ( died 2015 ) june 16 – erich segal , american novelist ( died 2010 ) july 3 – tom stoppard ( tomáš straussler ) , czech-born english dramatist july 6 – bessie head , south african-born botswanan fiction writer ( died 1986 ) august 3 – peter van gestel , dutch writer ( died 2019 ) august 5 – carla lane ( romana barrack ) , english comedy writer ( died 2016 ) august 19 richard ingrams , english editor alexander vampilov , russian dramatist ( drowned 1972 ) september 5 – dick clement , english television comedy writer october 4 – jackie collins , english-born romance novelist ( died 2015 ) october 7 – christopher booker , english journalist and editor ( died 2019 ) november 9 roger mcgough , english poet s . abdul rahman , tamil poet ( died 2017 ) november 17 – peter cook , english comedian , satirist and writer ( died 1995 ) december 3 – binod bihari verma , maithili man of letters ( died 2003 ) december 11 – jim harrison , american novelist and poet ( died 2016 ) december 22 david f . case , american novelist and short story writer charlotte lamb ( sheila holland , sheila coates , etc . ) , english romantic novelist ( died 2000 ) unknown date – parijat ( bishnu kumari waiba ) , nepalese novelist and poet ( died 1993 ) . deaths . february 19 edward garnett , english critic ( born 1868 ) horacio quiroga , uruguayan short story writer ( suicide , born 1878 ) march 7 – tomas o'crohan , irish gaelic writer and fisherman ( born 1856 ) march 8 – albert verwey , dutch poet ( born 1865 ) march 15 – h . p . lovecraft , american horror writer ( intestinal cancer , born 1890 ) march 25 – john drinkwater , english poet and dramatist ( born 1882 ) may 20 – frederic taber cooper , american editor and writer ( born 1864 ) june 4 – w . f . harvey , english horror-story writer ( born 1885 ) june 13 – william f . lloyd , english-born newfoundland journalist and prime minister ( born 1864 ) june 19 – j . m . barrie , scottish novelist and dramatist ( born 1860 ) june 22 – jean-joseph rabearivelo , malagasy poet ( suicide , born 1901 or 1903 ) july 18 – julian bell , english poet ( killed in spanish civil war , born 1908 ) august 11 – edith wharton ( edith newbold jones ) , american novelist and short-story writer ( born 1862 ) august 14 – h . c . mcneile ( sapper ) , english novelist and soldier ( born 1888 ) september 13 – ellis parker butler , american humorist , novelist and essayist ( born 1869 ) october 16 – jean de brunhoff , french children 's author and illustrator ( born 1899 ) october 17 – florence dugdale , english children 's writer , widow of thomas hardy ( cancer , born 1879 ) cambridge companion to thomas hardy . p . xxiii . retrieved 2015-02-23 . october 22 – chūya nakahara ( 中原 中也 ) , japanese poet ( meningitis , born 1907 ) october 31 – ralph connor , canadian novelist ( born 1860 ) december 24 – elizabeth haldane , scottish author , philosopher and suffragist ( born 1862 ) december 26 – ivor gurney , english war poet and composer ( tuberculosis , born 1890 ) december 29 – don marquis , american poet ( stroke , born 1878 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : eve garnett , the family from one end street james tait black memorial prize for fiction : neil m . gunn , highland river james tait black memorial prize for biography : lord eustace percy , john knox newbery medal for children 's literature : ruth sawyer , roller skates nobel prize in literature : roger martin du gard pulitzer prize for drama : moss hart , george s . kaufman , you ca n't take it with you pulitzer prize for poetry : robert frost , a further range pulitzer prize for the novel : margaret mitchell , gone with the wind king 's gold medal for poetry : w . h . auden . references .