Ted Lewis (musician)

early life . born in circleville , ohio , lewis was one of the first northern musicians to start imitating the new orleans jazz musicians who came up to new york in the teens . he first recorded in 1917 with earl fuller , who were attempting to copy the sound of the city 's newest sensation , the original dixieland jass band . at the time , lewis did not seem to be able to do much on the clarinet other than trill . ( promoting one recording the victor catalog stated : '' the sounds as of a dog in his dying anguish are from ted lewis ' clarinet '' . ) tim gracyk , '' earl fuller 's famous jazz band '' , popular american recording pioneers 1895-1925 , via red hot jazz archive . he improved a bit later , forming his style from the influences of the first new orleans clarinetists to reside in new york , larry shields , alcide nunez , and achille baquet . career . by 1919 , lewis was leading his own band , and had a recording contract with columbia records , which marketed him as their answer to the original dixieland jass band who recorded for victor records . for a time ( as they did with paul whiteman ) columbia gave him a special record label featuring his picture . at the start of the 1920s , he was considered by many people without previous knowledge of jazz ( that is to say , most of america ) to be one of the leading lights of hot jazz . lewis 's clarinet playing barely evolved beyond his style of 1919 which in later years would sound increasingly corny , but lewis certainly knew what good clarinet playing sounded like , for he hired musicians like benny goodman , jimmy dorsey , frank teschemacher , and don murray to play clarinet in his band . lewis actually could play normally well without missed notes , as exemplified by his earliest records . for years , his band also included jazz greats muggsy spanier on trumpet and george brunies on trombone . ted lewis ' band was second only to the paul whiteman band in popularity during the 1920s , and arguably played more real jazz with less pretension than whiteman , especially in his recordings of the late 1920s . lewis recorded for columbia from 1919–1933 . he was on decca 1934 into the 1940s . in 1932 , lewis recorded '' in a shanty in old shanty town '' , which he had performed in the film '' the crooner '' with his orchestra . it was released on a 78 and reached number one on the charts where it stayed for 10 weeks . one of lewis ' most memorable songs was '' me and my shadow '' with which he frequently closed his act . around 1928 , lewis noticed an usher named eddie chester mimicking his movements during his act . he hired chester to follow him on stage as his shadow during '' me and my shadow '' . eddie was followed by four other african-american shadows , the most famous being charles '' snowball '' whittier , making ted one of the first prominent white entertainers to showcase african-american performers . '' ted lewis biography '' ted lewis museum ted lewis and his orchestra were one of the featured entertainers at the 1939 golden gate international exposition – pageant of the pacific on treasure island . the sunday , august 13 , 1939 program of special attractions and events indicates that the ted lewis orchestra performed from 2:45 to 3:45 & nbsp ; p.m . and from 5:00 to 6:00 & nbsp ; p.m . in the temple compound and from 8:30 to 11:30 & nbsp ; p.m . in the treasure island music hall for a free dance . 1939 golden gate international exposition program of special attractions and events for sunday , august 13 , 1939 . lewis ' band became cornier and schmaltzier as the great depression wore on , but this seemed to match the general public 's taste , as he remained commercially successful during an era when many bands broke up . through it all he retained his famous catchphrase '' is everybody happy ? '' , along with '' yessir ! '' . lewis adopted a battered top hat for sentimental , hard-luck tunes ( he called himself '' the high-hatted tragedian of song '' ) . frequently he would stray from song lyrics , improvising chatter around them . this gave the effect of lewis '' speaking '' the song spontaneously : '' when ma ' baby . when ma ' baby smiles at me . gee , what a wonderful , wonderful light that comes to her eyes . look at that light , folks . '' lewis kept his band together through the 1950s , and continued to make appearances in las vegas and on television ( appearing as the mystery guest on what 's my line ? in 1956 , for example ) into the 1960s . true to his vaudeville beginnings , he created a visual as well as a musical act . his physical presence with props like his top hat combined with bits of visual humor and dancing were as important to him as his music . films . lewis and his band appeared in a few early-talkie movie musicals in 1929 , notably the warner brothers revue the show of shows . the first of several films titled with lewis ' catchphrase , is everybody happy ? also premiered in 1929 , while 1935 saw lewis and his band performing several numbers in the film here comes the band . in 1941 the band was recruited at the last minute , along with the andrews sisters , to furnish musical numbers for the abbott and costello comedy hold that ghost ( 1941 ) , released by universal studios on august 6 , 1941 . musical numbers cut from the feature were released by universal separately on september 3 , 1941 , in a short subject entitled is everybody happy ? in 1943 columbia pictures mounted a feature-length biographical film of lewis—yet again titled is everybody happy ? —with actor michael duane portraying the bandleader and lip synching to lewis 's recordings . there is an extended caricature of lewis in the warner brothers short speaking of the weather ( tashlin , 1937 ) , playing plenty of money and you . personal life . lewis married adah becker ( 1897 – may 31 , 1981 ) in 1915 . she was a ballerina when ted met her that same year in rochester new york . only six weeks later they were married in three separate ceremonies on the same day , first by a justice of the peace , next by a rabbi and finally on stage that night . they remained married for 56 years until the death of ted . adah gave up her dancing career to become his secretary , business manager and loving wife throughout her husband 's long career . once married , ted and adah lived in a 15-room apartment overlooking new york city 's central park for the remainder of their lives . lewis died in his sleep in new york on august 25 , 1971 , of lung failure at the age of 81 . following a jewish funeral service in new york city , his body was brought to circleville where thousands walked past his coffin . rabbi jerome d . folkman who officiated remarked , '' the song has ended , but the memory lingers on . '' the burial was held at the local forest cemetery . lewis 's stone , in the family plot , has his hat and cane incised upon it . his wife adah , who died on may 31 , 1981 , rests beside him . upon his death , the city of new york , yale and harvard universities and the smithsonian institution asked adah for his memorabilia . she politely declined , saying ted wanted everything to come back to the '' capital of the world , '' circleville , ohio . the ted lewis museum , located across the street from where he was born , was dedicated on june 5 , 1977 . adah , who had dreamed of a museum in the hometown that ted loved so much , was present for the museum 's opening ceremonies . large numbers of celebrities , relatives , friends and ted lewis admirers from everywhere attended the dedication . the ted lewis theater within the museum provides an opportunity for visitors to see ted lewis in performance by means of early tv and movie clips . file : tedlewis1.jpg ted lewis park in circleville , ohio . file : tedlewis2.jpg ted lewis museum at 133 west main street in circleville , ohio . file : tedlewis3.jpg ted lewis headstone at forest cemetery in circleville , ohio . file : tedlewis4.jpg ted lewis gravemarker . file : tedlewis5.jpg adah becker lewis gravemarker . . references . external links . ted lewis recordings at the discography of american historical recordings . ted lewis : master showman of jazz at the syncopated times ted lewis ( 1890-1971 ) at red hot jazz archive ted lewis museum in circleville , ohio