Subaru Telescope

overview . the subaru telescope is a ritchey-chretien reflecting telescope . instruments can be mounted at a cassegrain focus below the primary mirror ; at either of two nasmyth focal points in enclosures on the sides of the telescope mount , to which light can be directed with a tertiary mirror ; or at the prime focus in lieu of a secondary mirror , an arrangement rare on large telescopes , to provide a wide field of view suited to deep wide-field surveys . in 1984 , the university of tokyo formed an engineering working group to develop and study the concept of a telescope . in 1985 , the astronomy committee of japan 's science council gave top priority to the development of a '' japan national large telescope '' ( jnlt ) , and in 1986 , the university of tokyo signed an agreement with the university of hawaii to build the telescope in hawaii . in 1988 , the national astronomical observatory of japan was formed through a reorganization of the university 's tokyo astronomical observatory , to oversee the jnlt and other large national astronomy projects . construction of the subaru telescope began in april 1991 , and later that year , a public contest gave the telescope its official name , '' subaru telescope . '' construction was completed in 1998 , and the first scientific images were taken in january 1999 . in september 1999 , princess sayako of japan dedicated the telescope . a number of state-of-the-art technologies were worked into the telescope design . for example , 261 computer-controlled actuators press the main mirror from underneath , which corrects for primary mirror distortion caused by changes in the telescope orientation . the telescope enclosure building is also shaped to improve the quality of astronomical images by minimizing the effects caused by atmospheric turbulence . subaru is one of the few state-of-the-art telescopes to have been used with the naked eye . for the dedication , an eyepiece was constructed so that princess sayako could look through it directly . it was enjoyed by the staff for a few nights until it was replaced with the much more sensitive working instruments . subaru is the primary tool in the search for planet nine . its large field of view , 75 times that of the keck telescopes , and strong light-gathering power are suited for deep wide-field sky surveys . the search , split between a research group led by batygin and brown and another led by sheppard and trujillo , is expected to take up to five years . . accidents during construction . two separate incidents claimed the lives of four workers during the construction of the telescope . on october 13 , 1993 , 42-year-old paul f . lawrence was fatally injured when a forklift tipped over onto him . on january 16 , 1996 , sparks from a welder ignited insulation which smoldered , generating noxious smoke that killed marvin arruda , 52 , ricky del rosario , 38 , and warren k . '' kip '' kaleo , 36 , and sent twenty-six other workers to the hospital in hilo . all four workers are memorialized by a plaque outside the base of the telescope dome and a sign posted temporarily each january along the mauna kea access road . mishap in 2011 . on july 2 , 2011 , the telescope operator in hilo noted an anomaly from the top unit of the telescope . upon further examination , coolant from the top unit was found to have leaked over the primary mirror and other parts of the telescope . observation using nasmyth foci resumed on july 22 , and cassegrain focus resumed on august 26 . . instruments . several cameras and spectrographs can be mounted at subaru telescope 's four focal points for observations in visible and infrared wavelengths . ; multi-object infrared camera and spectrograph ( moircs ) : wide-field camera and spectrograph with the ability to take spectra of multiple objects simultaneously , mounts at the cassegrain focus . ; infrared camera and spectrograph ( ircs ) : used in conjunction with the new 188-element adaptive optics unit ( ao188 ) , mounted at the infrared nasmyth focus . ; cooled mid infrared camera and spectrometer ( comics ) : mid-infrared camera and spectrometer with the ability to study cool interstellar dust , mounts on the cassegrain focus . ; faint object camera and spectrograph ( focas ) : visible-light camera and spectrograph with the ability to take spectra of up to 100 objects simultaneously , mounts on the cassegrain focus . ; subaru prime focus camera ( suprime-cam ) : 80-megapixel wide-field visible-light camera , mounts at the prime focus . superseded by the hyper suprime-cam in 2012 , decommissioned in may 2017 . ; high dispersion spectrograph ( hds ) : visible-light spectrograph mounted at the optical nasmyth focus . ; fiber multi object spectrograph ( fmos ) : infrared spectrograph using movable fiber optics to take spectra of up to 400 objects simultaneously . mounts at the prime focus . ; high-contrast coronographic imager for adaptive optics ( hiciao ) : infrared camera for hunting planets around other stars . used with ao188 , mounted at the infrared nasmyth focus . ; hyper suprime-cam ( hsc ) : this 900-megapixel ultra-wide-field ( 1.5° field of view ) camera saw first light in 2012 , and will be offered for open-use in 2014 . the extremely large wide-field correction optics ( a seven-element lens with some elements up to a meter in diameter ) was manufactured by canon and delivered march 29 , 2011 . it will be used for surveys of weak lensing to determine dark matter distribution . ; subaru coronagraphic extreme adaptive optics ( scexao ) : the subaru coronagraphic extreme adaptive optics ( scexao ) instrument is a high-contrast imaging system for direct imaging exoplanets . scexao website the coronagraph uses a phase induced amplitude apodization ( piaa ) design which means it will be able to image planets closer to their stars than conventional lyot type coronagraph designs . for example , at a distance of 100 pc , the piaa coronagraph on scexao would be able to image from 4 au outwards while gemini planet imager and vlt-sphere from 12 au outwards . jovanovic , n . , martinache , f . , guyon , o . , clergeon , c . , singh , g . , kudo , t . , vievard , s . , newman , k . , minowa , y . , hayano , y . , kuhn , j . , serabyn , e . , norris , b . , tuthill , p . , stewart , p . , huby , e . , perrin , g . , lacour , s . , murakami , n . , fumika , o . , 2014 , '' scexao as a precursor to an elt exoplanet direct imaging instrument '' , the system also has several other types of coronagraph : vortex , four-quadrant phase mask and 8-octant phase mask versions , and a shaped pupil coronagraph . the phase i of construction is complete scexao science ready capabilities and phase ii construction to be complete by end of 2014 scexao future capabilities for science operations in 2015 . scexao will initially use the hiciao camera but this will be replaced by charis , an integral field spectrograph , around 2016 .