Pierre Daniel Huet

life . he was born in caen in 1630 , and educated at the jesuit school there . he also received lessons from a protestant pastor , samuel bochart . by the age of twenty he was recognized as one of the most promising scholars of his time . in 1651 he went to paris , where he formed a friendship with gabriel naudé , conservator of the mazarin library . in the following year samuel bochart , being invited by queen christina of sweden to her court at stockholm , took his friend huet with him . this journey , in which he saw leiden , amsterdam and copenhagen , as well as stockholm , resulted chiefly in the discovery , in the swedish royal library , of some fragments of origen 's commentary on st matthew , which gave huet the idea of editing and translating origen into latin , a task he completed in 1668 . he eventually quarrelled with bochart , who accused him of having suppressed a line in origen in the eucharistic controversy . while working on origen 's greek text , huet wrote a separate treatise on translation history , theory , and practice , the '' de optimo genere interpretandi '' ( '' on the best kind of translating '' ) in two books ( first published 1660 ; 3rd and last ed . amsterdam , 1683 ) . huet was also the cofounder of the academie du physique in caen , the first provincial academy of science to be granted a royal charter ( 1668 ) . huet was the initial patron of the academy , and along with andre graindorge , directed the work of the group , which focused on the empirical study of nature , with a special emphasis on anatomy and dissections . huet 's presence was critical to the success of the academy , which floundered without his continued presence . he acted as head of the group from 1662–1667 , and again in 1668 , when he left caen again for paris . he also ended his financial support of the academy at this time , as it began to receive royal funding and direction from the royal representative in normandy , guy chamillart . in paris he entered into close relations with jean chapelain . during the famous '' dispute of ancients and moderns '' , huet took the side of the ancients against charles perrault and jean desmarets . among his friends at this period were valentin conrart and paul pellisson . his taste for mathematics led him to the study of astronomy . he next turned his attention to anatomy , and , being myopia , devoted his inquiries mainly to the question of vision and the formation of the eye . in the course of this study , he made more than 800 dissections . he then learned all that was then to be learned in chemistry , and wrote a latin poem on salt . all this time he was a frequent visitor to the salons of mlle de scudéry and the studios of painters ; his scientific researches did not interfere with his classical studies , for during this time he was discussing with bochart the origin of certain medals , and was learning syriac and arabic under the jesuit adrien parvilliers . huet was admitted to the académie française in 1674 . he took holy orders in 1676 , and two years later the king made him abbot of aunay . in 1685 he became bishop of soissons , but after waiting for installation for four years he took the bishopric of avranches instead . he exchanged the cares of his bishopric for what he thought would be the easier chair of the abbey of fontenay , but there he was vexed with continual lawsuits . at length he retired to the jesuits ' house in the rue saint-antoine at paris , where he died in 1721 . his great library and manuscripts , after being bequeathed to the jesuits , were bought by the king for the royal library . works . he translated the pastorals of longus , wrote a tale called diane de castro , and gave with his traitté de l'origine des romans ( 1670 ) , his treatise on the origin of romances the first world history of fiction . on being appointed assistant tutor to the dauphin in 1670 , he edited , with the assistance of anne lefêvre ( afterwards madame dacier ) and jacques-bénigne bossuet , the well-known book series , the delphin classics ( referred to in the original latin as the '' ad usum delphini '' series ) . this series published comprehensive editions of the latin classics in about sixty volumes , and each work was accompanied by a latin commentary , ordo verborum , and verbal index . the original volumes have each an engraving of arion and a dolphin , and the appropriate inscription in usum serenissimi delphini . in addition to huet 's edition and translation of the ancient greek theologian origen , huet published two works on the history and process of translation itself , '' de optimo genere interpretandi '' ( '' on the best kind of translating '' ) and '' de claris interpretibus '' ( '' on famous translators '' ; 3rd and last ed 1683 ) . he issued one of his major works , the demonstratio evangelica , in 1679 . at aulnay he wrote his questiones aletuanae ( caen , 1690 ) , his censura philosophiae cartesianae ( paris , 1689 ) , his nouveau mémoire pour servir à l'histoire du cartésianisme ( new memoirs to serve the history of cartesianism , 1692 ) , and his discussion with nicolas boileau-despréaux on the sublime . in the huetiana ( 1722 ) of the abbé d'olivet will be found material for arriving at an idea of his prodigious labours , exact memory and wide scholarship . another posthumous work was his traité philosophique de la faiblesse de l'esprit humain ( original spelling : traité philosophique de la foiblesse de l ’ esprit humain ) ( amsterdam , 1723 ) , which he considered to be his best work . his autobiography , found in his commentarius de rebus ad eum pertinentibus ( paris , 1718 ) , has been translated into french mémoires de pierre daniel huet , new edition , philippe-joseph salazar ed . , paris/toulouse , klincksieck/slc , 1993 , 170 p . and into english . legacy . the lycée in hérouville-saint-clair , calvados , was formerly named after huet , though it has now ceased to be so . references . sources . pierre daniel huet , against cartesian philosophy ( censura philosophiae cartesianae ) . amherst : humanity books 2003 . april g . shelford , transforming the republic of letters : pierre-daniel huet and european intellectual life , 1650-1720 ( rochester , university of rochester press , 2007 ) . james albert delater , '' translation theory in the age of louis xiv : the 1683 'de optimo genere interpretandi ' ( 'on the best kind of translating ' ) of pierre-daniel huet ( 1630-1721 ) '' ( st . jerome publishing , manchester uk , 2002 ) . external links .