History of Hesse

prehistoric . in the paleolithic era , the central hessian region around wetzlar was settled . extensive excavations along the lahn in wetzlar-dalheim recently uncovered a 7000-year-old settlement from the linear pottery culture . bell beaker shards found in rüsselsheim , offenbach , griesheim and wiesbaden suggest settlement in southern hesse 4,500 years ago . landgraviate . in 1568 with the death of landgrave philip i , the landgraviate of hesse , a german principality of the holy roman empire , was divided among his sons . with the extinction of the hesse-marburg and hesse-rheinfels lines by 1604 , hesse-darmstadt , along with hesse-kassel , became one of the two hessian states . while hesse-kassel converted to calvinism and became one of the most zealous exponents of the protestant cause in the thirty years ' war , landgrave george ii remained a strict lutheran and maintained a close alliance with saxony , which led to a pro-habsburg policy after 1642 . hesse-darmstadt gained a great deal of territory from the secularization and modifications authorized by the of 1803 . the acquisition of the duchy of westphalia , formerly owned by the archbishop of cologne , was significant , as were the acquisition of territories from the archbishop of mainz and the bishop of worms . in 1806 , upon the dissolution of the reich and the dispossession of his cousin , the elector of hesse-kassel , the landgrave took the title of grand duke of hesse . at the congress of vienna , the grand duke was forced to cede westphalia to prussia . in exchange for this he received a piece of territory from the left bank of the rhine , including the important federal fortress at mainz . the grand duchy changed its name to the grand duchy of hesse and by rhine in 1816 . in 1867 , the northern half of the grand duchy ( upper hesse ) became a part of the north german confederation , while the half of the grand duchy south of the main ( starkenburg and rheinhessen ) remained outside . in 1871 , it became a constituent state of the german empire . the last grand duke , ernst ludwig ( a grandson of queen victoria and brother to empress alexandra of russia ) , was forced from his throne at the end of world war i . the state was then renamed the ( people 's state of hesse ) . the majority of the state combined with frankfurt am main , the waldeck area ( rhine-province ) and the old prussian province of hesse-nassau to form the new state of hesse following the second world war . excepted was the montabaur district from hessen-nassau and that part of hessen-darmstadt on the left bank of the rhine ( rheinhessen ) became part of the rhineland-palatinate state . ( bad ) wimpfen — an exclave of hessen-darmstadt — became part of baden-württemberg , district of sinsheim . 17th and 18th centuries . from the early years of the reformation , the house of hesse was predominately protestant . landgraves philip i , william v , and maurice married descendants of king george of bohemia ; from william vi onwards , mothers of the heads of hesse-kassel were always descended from william the silent , the leader of the dutch to independence on the basis of calvinism . the landgraviate of hesse-kassel expanded in 1604 when maurice , landgrave of hesse-kassel inherited the landgraviate of hesse-marburg from his childless uncle , louis iv , landgrave of hesse-marburg ( 1537–1604 ) . during the thirty years ' war , calvinist hesse-kassel proved to be sweden 's most loyal german ally . landgrave william v and , after his death in 1637 , his widow amelia of hanau , a granddaughter of william the silent , as regent supported the protestant cause and the france and swedes throughout the war and maintained an army , garrisoning many strongholds , while hesse-kassel itself was occupied by imperial troops . william v was succeeded by landgraves william vi and william vii . under king frederick i of sweden , hesse-kassel was in personal union with sweden from 1730–51 . but in fact the king 's younger brother , prince william , ruled in kassel as regent until he succeeded his brother , reigning as william viii until 1760 . although it was a fairly widespread practice at the time to rent out troops to other princes , it was the landgraves of hesse-kassel who became infamous for hiring out contingents of their army as mercenaries during the 17th and 18th centuries . hesse-kassel maintained 7 % of its entire population under arms throughout the eighteenth century . this force served as a source of mercenaries for other european states . tilly , charles '' coercion , capital , and european states . '' frederick ii , notably , hired out so many troops to his nephew king george iii of great britain for use in the american war of independence , that '' hessian '' has became a common term among americans and historians for all germans in the american revolution . one of these regiments that saw service in america was the musketeer regiment prinz carl . during the 17th century , the landgraviate was internally divided for dynastic purposes , without allodial rights , into : the landgraviate of hesse-rotenburg ( 1627–1834 ) the hesse-wanfried ( 1649–1755 ) the landgraviate of hesse-philippsthal hesse-philippsthal-barchfeld these were reunited with the landgraviate of hesse-kassel when each particular branch died out without issue . 19th century . following the reorganization of the german states during the german mediatization of 1803 , the landgraviate of hesse-kassel was raised to the electorate of hesse and landgrave william ix was elevated to prince-elector , taking the title william i , elector of hesse . the principality thus became known as , although it is still usually referred to as hesse-kassel . in 1806 , william i was dispossessed by napoleon bonaparte for his support of the kingdom of prussia . kassel became the capital of a new kingdom of westphalia with napoleon 's brother jérôme bonaparte as king . the elector was restored following napoleon 's defeat in 1813 , and although the holy roman empire was now defunct , william retained his title of elector , as it gave him pre-eminence over his cousin , the grand duke of hesse . from 1813 onwards , the electorate of hesse was an independent country and , after 1815 , a member of the german confederation . william 's grandson , elector frederick william , sided with the austrian empire in the austro-prussian war . following the prussian victory his lands were annexed by prussia in 1866 . along with the annexed nassau ( state ) and frankfurt-am-main , hesse-kassel became part of the new province of hesse-nassau of the kingdom of prussia . 20th century . in 1918 , hesse-nassau became part of the free state of prussia until 1944 . from 1944–45 as part of nazi germany , it was divided into the prussian provinces of kurhessen and nassau . from 1945–46 , it was renamed greater hesse and was part of the us occupation zone in germany . from 1946 onwards , it was reorganized into the state of hesse , a federal state of west germany . in 1918 , prince frederick charles of hesse , younger brother of the head of the house and a brother-in-law of emperor william ii , was elected by the pro-german finland government to be king of finland , but he never reigned . in 1968 , the head of the house of hesse-kassel became the head of the entire house of hesse due to the extinction of the house of hesse-darmstadt . see also . history of frankfurt am main and timeline of frankfurt politics of hesse timeline of kassel