Bastnäsite

composition . bastnäsite has cerium , lanthanum and yttrium in its generalized formula but officially the mineral is divided into three minerals based on the predominant rare-earth element . beatty , richard ; 2007 ; th℮ lanthanides ; publish℮d by marshall cavendish . there is bastnäsite- ( ce ) with a more accurate formula of ( ce , la ) co 3 f . there is also bastnäsite- ( la ) with a formula of ( la , ce ) co 3 f . and finally there is bastnäsite- ( y ) with a formula of ( y , ce ) co 3 f . there is little difference in the three in terms of physical properties and most bastnäsite is bastnäsite- ( ce ) . cerium in most natural bastnäsites usually dominates the others . bastnäsite and the phosphate mineral monazite are the two largest sources of cerium , an important industrial metal . bastnäsite is closely related to the mineral series parisite . gupta , c . k . ( 2004 ) extractive metallurgy of rare earths , crc press . the two are both rare-earth fluorocarbonates , but parisite 's formula of ca ( ce , la , nd ) 2 ( co 3 ) 3 f 2 contains calcium ( and a small amount of neodymium ) and a different ratio of constituent ions . parisite could be viewed as a formula unit of calcite ( caco 3 ) added to two formula units of bastnäsite . in fact , the two have been shown to alter back and forth with the addition or loss of caco 3 in natural environments . bastnäsite forms a series with the minerals hydroxylbastnäsite- ( ce ) ( ce , la ) co 3 ( oh , f ) and hydroxylbastnäsite- ( nd ) . the three are members of a substitution series that involves the possible substitution of fluoride ( f − ) ions with hydroxyl ( oh − ) ions . name . bastnäsite gets its name from its type locality , the bastnäs mine , riddarhyttan , västmanland , sweden . ore from the bastnäs mine led to the discovery of several new minerals and chemical elements by swedish scientists such as jöns jakob berzelius , wilhelm hisinger and carl gustav mosander . among these are the chemical elements cerium , which was described by hisinger in 1803 , and lanthanum in 1839 . hisinger , who was also the owner of the bastnäs mine , chose to name one of the new minerals bastnäsit when it was first described by him in 1838 . . occurrence . although a scarce mineral and never in great concentrations , it is one of the more common rare-earth carbonates . bastnäsite has been found in karst bauxite deposits in hungary , greece and the balkans region . also found in carbonatites , a rare carbonate igneous intrusive rock , at the fen complex , norway ; bayan obo , mongolia ; kangankunde , malawi ; kizilcaoren , turkey and the mountain pass rare earth mine in california , us . at mountain pass , bastnäsite is the leading ore mineral . some bastnäsite has been found in the unusual granites of the langesundsfjord area , norway ; kola peninsula , russia ; mont saint-hilaire mines , ontario , and thor lake deposits , northwest territories , canada . hydrothermal sources have also been reported . the formation of hydroxylbastnasite ( ndco 3 oh ) can also occur via the crystallization of a rare-earth bearing amorphous precursor . with increasing temperature , the habit of ndco 3 oh crystals changes progressively to more complex spherulitic or dendritic morphologies . the development of these crystal morphologies has been suggested vallina , b . , rodriguez-blanco , j . d . , blanco , j . a . and benning , l . g . ( 2014 ) the effect of heating on the morphology of crystalline neodymium hydroxycarbonate , ndco 3 oh . mineralogical magazine , 78 , 1391–1397 . doi : 10.1180/minmag.2014.078.6.05 . to be controlled by the level at which supersaturation is reached in the aqueous solution during the breakdown of the amorphous precursor . at higher temperature ( e.g . , 220 & nbsp ; °c ) and after rapid heating ( e.g . long , keith r . , bradley s . van gosen , nora k . foley , and daniel cordier . '' scientific investigations report 2010 -- 5220 '' . the principal rare earth elements deposits of the united states -- a summary of domestic deposits and a global perspective . usgs , 2010 . web . 03 mar . 2014 . mcillree , roderick . '' kvanefjeld project – major technical breakthrough '' . asx announcements . greenland minerals and energy ltd , 23 feb . 2012 . web . 03 mar . 2014 . after extraction , bastnasite ore is typically used in this process , with an average of 7 % reo ( rare-earth oxides ) . the ore goes through comminution using rod mills , ball mills , or autogenous mills . steam is consistently used to condition the ground ore , along with soda ash fluosilicate , and usually tail oil c-30 . this is done to coat the various types of rare earth metals with either flocculent , collectors , or modifiers for easier separation in the next step . flotation using the previous chemicals to separate the gangue from the rare-earth metals . concentrate the rare-earth metals and filter out large particles . remove excess water by heating to ~100 & nbsp ; °c . add hcl to solution to reduce ph to 2 , typically . solvents are added ( solvent type and concentration based on area , availability , and cost ) to help separate eu , sm , and gd from la , nd , and pr . reduction agents ( based on area ) are used to oxidize eu , sm , and gd . eu is precipitated and calcified . gd is precipitated as an oxide . sm is precipitated as an oxide . solvent is recycled into step 11 . additional solvent is added based on concentration and purity . la separated from nd , pr , and sx . nd and pr separated . sx goes on for recovery and recycle . one way to collect la is adding hno 3 , creating la ( no 3 ) 3 . hno 3 typically added at a very high molarity ( 1–5 m ) , depending on la concentration and amount . another method is to add hcl to la , creating lacl 3 . hcl is added at 1 m to 5 m depending on la concentration . solvent from la , nd , and pr separation is recycled to step 11 . nd is precipitated as an oxide product . pr is precipitated as an oxide product . references . bibliography . palache , p . ; berman h . ; frondel , c . ( 1960 ) . '' dana 's system of mineralogy , volume ii : halides , nitrates , borates , carbonates , sulfates , phosphates , arsenates , tungstates , molybdates , etc . ( seventh edition ) '' john wiley and sons , inc . , new york , pp . 289-291 .