Type 2 diabetes

signs and symptoms . the classic symptoms of diabetes are frequent urination ( polyuria ) , increased thirst ( polydipsia ) , increased hunger ( polyphagia ) , and weight loss . other symptoms that are commonly present at diagnosis include a history of blurred vision , pruritus , peripheral neuropathy , recurrent vulvovaginitis , and fatigue . other symptoms may include loss of taste . many people , however , have no symptoms during the first few years and are diagnosed on routine testing . a small number of people with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes can develop a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state ( a condition of very high blood sugar associated with a decreased level of consciousness and hypotension ) . . complications . type 2 diabetes is typically a chronic disease associated with a ten-year-shorter life expectancy . this is partly due to a number of complications with which it is associated , including : two to four times the risk of cardiovascular disease , including ischemic heart disease and stroke ; a 20-fold increase in lower limb amputations , and increased rates of hospitalizations . in the developed world , and increasingly elsewhere , type & nbsp ; 2 & nbsp ; diabetes is the largest cause of nontraumatic blindness and kidney failure . it has also been associated with an increased risk of cognitive dysfunction and dementia through disease processes such as alzheimer 's disease and vascular dementia . other complications include hyperpigmentation of skin ( acanthosis nigricans ) , sexual dysfunction , and frequent infections . there is also an association between type 2 diabetes and mild hearing loss . . causes . the development of type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes is caused by a combination of lifestyle and genetic factors . while some of these factors are under personal control , such as diet and obesity , other factors are not , such as increasing age , female gender , and genetics . obesity is more common in women than men in many parts of africa . the nutritional status of a mother during fetal development may also play a role , with one proposed mechanism being that of dna methylation . the intestinal bacteria prevotella copri and bacteroides vulgatus have been connected with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes . . lifestyle . lifestyle factors are important to the development of type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes , including obesity and being overweight ( defined by a body mass index of greater than 25 ) , lack of physical activity , poor diet , stress , and urbanization . excess body fat is associated with 30 % of cases in those of chinese and japanese descent , 60–80 % of cases in those of european and african descent , and 100 % of cases in pima indians and pacific islanders . among those who are not obese , a high waist–hip ratio is often present . smoking appears to increase the risk of type 2 diabetes . a lack of sleep has also been linked to type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes . laboratory studies have linked short-term sleep deprivations to changes in glucose metabolism , nervous system activity , or hormonal factors that may lead to diabetes . dietary factors also influence the risk of developing type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes . consumption of sugar-sweetened drinks in excess is associated with an increased risk . the type of fats in the diet are important , with saturated fats and trans fatty acids increasing the risk , and polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat decreasing the risk . eating a lot of white rice appears to play a role in increasing risk . a lack of exercise is believed to cause 7 % of cases . persistent organic pollutants may also play a role . . genetics . most cases of diabetes involve many genes , with each being a small contributor to an increased probability of becoming a type & nbsp ; 2 diabetic . the proportion of diabetes that is inherited is estimated at 72 % . more than 36 & nbsp ; genes and 80 & nbsp ; single-nucleotide polymorphism ( snps ) had been found that contribute to the risk of type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes . all of these genes together still only account for 10 % of the total heritable component of the disease . the tcf7l2 allele , for example , increases the risk of developing diabetes by 1.5 & nbsp ; times and is the greatest risk of the common genetic variants . most of the genes linked to diabetes are involved in pancreatic beta cell functions . there are a number of rare cases of diabetes that arise due to an abnormality in a single gene ( known as monogenic forms of diabetes or diabetes mellitus other types ) . these include maturity onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) , donohue syndrome , and rabson–mendenhall syndrome , among others . maturity onset diabetes of the young constitute 1–5 % of all cases of diabetes in young people . . medical conditions . there are a number of medications and other health problems that can predispose to diabetes . some of the medications include : glucocorticoids , thiazides , beta blockers , atypical antipsychotics , and statins . those who have previously had gestational diabetes are at a higher risk of developing type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes . other health problems that are associated include : acromegaly , cushing 's syndrome , hyperthyroidism , pheochromocytoma , and certain cancers such as glucagonomas . individuals with cancer may be at a higher risk of mortality if they also have diabetes . testosterone deficiency is also associated with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes . eating disorders may also interact with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes , with bulimia nervosa increasing the risk and anorexia nervosa decreasing it . . pathophysiology . type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes is due to insufficient insulin production from beta cells in the setting of insulin resistance . insulin resistance , which is the inability of cells to respond adequately to normal levels of insulin , occurs primarily within the muscles , liver , and fat tissue . in the liver , insulin normally suppresses glucose release . however , in the setting of insulin resistance , the liver inappropriately releases glucose into the blood . the proportion of insulin resistance versus beta cell dysfunction differs among individuals , with some having primarily insulin resistance and only a minor defect in insulin secretion and others with slight insulin resistance and primarily a lack of insulin secretion . other potentially important mechanisms associated with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes and insulin resistance include : increased breakdown of lipids within fat cells , resistance to and lack of incretin , high glucagon levels in the blood , increased retention of salt and water by the kidneys , and inappropriate regulation of metabolism by the central nervous system . however , not all people with insulin resistance develop diabetes since an impairment of insulin secretion by pancreatic beta cells is also required . in the early stages of insulin resistance , the mass of beta cells expands , increasing the output of insulin to compensate for the insulin insensitivity . but when type 2 diabetes has become manifest , a type 2 diabetic will have lost about half of their beta cells . fatty acids in the beta cells activate foxo1 , resulting in apopotosis of the beta cells . . diagnosis . the world health organization definition of diabetes ( both type & nbsp ; 1 and type & nbsp ; 2 ) is for a single raised glucose reading with symptoms , otherwise raised values on two occasions , of either : fasting plasma glucose ≥ 7.0 & nbsp ; mmol/l ( 126 & nbsp ; mg/dl ) : or with a glucose tolerance test , two hours after the oral dose a plasma glucose ≥ 11.1 & nbsp ; mmol/l ( 200 & nbsp ; mg/dl ) a random blood sugar of greater than 11.1 & nbsp ; mmol/l ( 200 & nbsp ; mg/dl ) in association with typical symptoms or a glycated hemoglobin ( hba 1c ) of ≥ & nbsp ; 48 & nbsp ; mmol/mol ( ≥ & nbsp ; 6.5 dcct % ) is another method of diagnosing diabetes . in 2009 an international expert committee that included representatives of the american diabetes association ( ada ) , the international diabetes federation ( idf ) , and the european association for the study of diabetes ( easd ) recommended that a threshold of ≥ & nbsp ; 48 & nbsp ; mmol/mol ( ≥ & nbsp ; 6.5 dcct % ) should be used to diagnose diabetes . this recommendation was adopted by the american diabetes association in 2010 . positive tests should be repeated unless the person presents with typical symptoms and blood sugars > 11.1 & nbsp ; mmol/l ( > 200 & nbsp ; mg/dl ) . threshold for diagnosis of diabetes is based on the relationship between results of glucose tolerance tests , fasting glucose or hba 1c and complications such as retinopathy . a fasting or random blood sugar is preferred over the glucose tolerance test , as they are more convenient for people . hba 1c has the advantages that fasting is not required and results are more stable but has the disadvantage that the test is more costly than measurement of blood glucose . it is estimated that 20 % of people with diabetes in the united states do not realize that they have the disease . type 2 diabetes is characterized by high blood glucose in the context of insulin resistance and relative insulin deficiency . this is in contrast to type 1 diabetes in which there is an absolute insulin deficiency due to destruction of islet cells in the pancreas and gestational diabetes that is a new onset of high blood sugars associated with pregnancy . type & nbsp ; 1 and type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes can typically be distinguished based on the presenting circumstances . if the diagnosis is in doubt antibody testing may be useful to confirm type & nbsp ; 1 diabetes and c-peptide levels may be useful to confirm type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes , with c-peptide levels normal or high in type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes , but low in type & nbsp ; 1 diabetes . . screening . no major organization recommends universal screening for diabetes as there is no evidence that such a program improve outcomes . screening is recommended by the united states preventive services task force ( uspstf ) in adults without symptoms whose blood pressure is greater than 135/80 & nbsp ; mmhg . for those whose blood pressure is less , the evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against screening . there is no evidence that it changes the risk of death in this group of people . they also recommend screening among those who are overweight and between the ages of 40 and 70 . the world health organization recommends testing those groups at high risk and in 2014 the uspstf is considering a similar recommendation . high-risk groups in the united states include : those over 45 years old ; those with a first degree relative with diabetes ; some ethnic groups , including hispanics , african-americans , and native-americans ; a history of gestational diabetes ; polycystic ovary syndrome ; excess weight ; and conditions associated with metabolic syndrome . the american diabetes association recommends screening those who have a bmi over 25 ( in people of asian descent screening is recommended for a bmi over 23 ) . . prevention . onset of type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes can be delayed or prevented through proper nutrition and regular exercise . intensive lifestyle measures may reduce the risk by over half . the benefit of exercise occurs regardless of the person 's initial weight or subsequent weight loss . high levels of physical activity reduce the risk of diabetes by about 28 % . evidence for the benefit of dietary changes alone , however , is limited , with some evidence for a diet high in green leafy vegetables and some for limiting the intake of sugary drinks . there is an association between higher intake of sugar-sweetened fruit juice and diabetes , but no evidence of an association with 100 % fruit juice . a 2019 review found evidence of benefit from dietary fiber . in those with impaired glucose tolerance , diet and exercise either alone or in combination with metformin or acarbose may decrease the risk of developing diabetes . lifestyle interventions are more effective than metformin . a 2017 review found that , long term , lifestyle changes decreased the risk by 28 % , while medication does not reduce risk after withdrawal . while low vitamin d levels are associated with an increased risk of diabetes , correcting the levels by supplementing vitamin d3 does not improve that risk . . management . management of type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes focuses on lifestyle interventions , lowering other cardiovascular risk factors , and maintaining blood glucose levels in the normal range . self-monitoring of blood glucose for people with newly diagnosed type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes may be used in combination with education , although the benefit of self-monitoring in those not using multi-dose insulin is questionable . in those who do not want to measure blood levels , measuring urine levels may be done . managing other cardiovascular risk factors , such as hypertension , high cholesterol , and microalbuminuria , improves a person 's life expectancy . decreasing the systolic blood pressure to less than 140 & nbsp ; mmhg is associated with a lower risk of death and better outcomes . intensive blood pressure management ( less than 130/80 & nbsp ; mmhg ) as opposed to standard blood pressure management ( less than 140-160 mmhg systolic to 85–100 mmhg diastolic ) results in a slight decrease in stroke risk but no effect on overall risk of death . intensive blood sugar lowering ( hba 1c 1c of 7–7.9 % ) does not appear to change mortality . the goal of treatment is typically an hba 1c of 7 to 8 % or a fasting glucose of less than 7.2 & nbsp ; mmol/l ( 130 & nbsp ; mg/dl ) ; however these goals may be changed after professional clinical consultation , taking into account particular risks of hypoglycemia and life expectancy . hypoglycemia is associated with adverse outcomes in older people with type 2 diabetes . despite guidelines recommending that intensive blood sugar control be based on balancing immediate harms with long-term benefits , many people & nbsp ; – for example people with a life expectancy of less than nine years who will not benefit , are over-treated . it is recommended that all people with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes get regular eye examinations . there is weak evidence suggesting that treating gum disease by scaling and root planing may result in a small short-term improvement in blood sugar levels for people with diabetes . there is no evidence to suggest that this improvement in blood sugar levels is maintained longer than four months . there is also not enough evidence to determine if medications to treat gum disease are effective at lowering blood sugar levels . . lifestyle . a proper diet and exercise are the foundations of diabetic care , with a greater amount of exercise yielding better results . exercise improves blood sugar control , decreases body fat content and decreases blood lipid levels , and these effects are evident even without weight loss . aerobic exercise leads to a decrease in hba 1c and improved insulin sensitivity . strength training is also useful and the combination of both types of exercise may be most effective . a diabetic diet which includes calorie restriction to promote weight loss is generally recommended . other recommendations include emphasizing intake of fruits , vegetables , reduced saturated fat and low-fat dairy products , and with a macronutrient intake tailored to the individual , to distribute calories and carbohydrates throughout the day . several diets may be effective such as the dietary approaches to stop hypertension ( dash ) , mediterranean diet , low-fat diet , or low glycemic index diet such as a low carbohydrate diet . viscous fiber supplements may be useful in those with diabetes . vegetarianism in general have been related to lower diabetes risk , but do not offer advantages compared with diets which allow moderate amounts of animal products . there is not enough evidence to suggest that cinnamon improves blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes . culturally appropriate education may help people with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes control their blood sugar levels , for up to 24 months . if changes in lifestyle in those with mild diabetes has not resulted in improved blood sugars within six weeks , medications should then be considered . there is not enough evidence to determine if lifestyle interventions affect mortality in those who already have dm2 . , there is insufficient data to recommend nonnutritive sweeteners , but note they may help reduce caloric intake . . medications . . blood sugar control . there are several classes of anti-diabetic medications available . metformin is generally recommended as a first line treatment as there is some evidence that it decreases mortality ; however , this conclusion is questioned . metformin should not be used in those with severe kidney or liver problems . a second oral agent of another class or insulin may be added if metformin is not sufficient after three months . other classes of medications include : sulfonylureas , thiazolidinediones , dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors , sglt2 inhibitors , and glucagon-like peptide-1 analogs . as of 2015 there was no significant difference between these agents . a 2018 review found that sglt2 inhibitors may be better than glucagon-like peptide-1 analogs or dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors . rosiglitazone , a thiazolidinedione , has not been found to improve long-term outcomes even though it improves blood sugar levels . additionally it is associated with increased rates of heart disease and death . injections of insulin may either be added to oral medication or used alone . most people do not initially need insulin . when it is used , a long-acting formulation is typically added at night , with oral medications being continued . doses are then increased to effect ( blood sugar levels being well controlled ) . when nightly insulin is insufficient , twice daily insulin may achieve better control . the long acting insulins glargine and detemir are equally safe and effective , and do not appear much better than neutral protamine hagedorn nph insulin , but as they are significantly more expensive , they are not cost effective as of 2010 . in those who are pregnant , insulin is generally the treatment of choice . . blood pressure lowering . many international guidelines recommend blood pressure treatment targets that are lower than 140/90 & nbsp ; mmhg for people with diabetes . however , there is only limited evidence regarding what the lower targets should be . a 2016 systematic review found potential harm to treating to targets lower than 140 mmhg , and a subsequent review in 2019 found no evidence of additional benefit from blood pressure lowering to between 130 - 140mmhg , although there was an increased risk of adverse events . 2015 american diabetes association recommendations are that people with diabetes and albuminuria should receive an inhibitor of the renin-angiotensin system to reduce the risks of progression to end-stage renal disease , cardiovascular events , and death . there is some evidence that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors ( aceis ) are superior to other inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system such as angiotensin receptor blockers ( arbs ) , or aliskiren in preventing cardiovascular disease . although a more recent review found similar effects of aceis and arbs on major cardiovascular and renal outcomes . there is no evidence that combining aceis and arbs provides additional benefits . . other . the use of aspirin to prevent cardiovascular disease in diabetes is controversial . aspirin is recommended in people at high risk of cardiovascular disease , however routine use of aspirin has not been found to improve outcomes in uncomplicated diabetes . 2015 american diabetes association recommendations for aspirin use ( based on expert consensus or clinical experience ) are that low-dose aspirin use is reasonable in adults with diabetes who are at intermediate risk of cardiovascular disease ( 10-year cardiovascular disease risk , 5–10 % ) . vitamin d supplementation to people with type 2 diabetes may improve markers of insulin resistance and hba1c . . surgery . bariatric surgery in those who are obese is an effective measure to treat diabetes . many are able to maintain normal blood sugar levels with little or no medication following surgery and long-term mortality is decreased . there however is some short-term mortality risk of less than 1 % from the surgery . the body mass index cutoffs for when surgery is appropriate are not yet clear . it is recommended that this option be considered in those who are unable to get both their weight and blood sugar under control . . epidemiology . globally as of 2015 it was estimated that there were 392 & nbsp ; million people with type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes making up about 90 % of diabetes cases . this is equivalent to about 6 % of the world 's population . diabetes is common both in the developed and the developing world . it remains uncommon , however , in the least developed countries . women seem to be at a greater risk as do certain ethnic groups , such as south asians , pacific islanders , latinos , and native americans . this may be due to enhanced sensitivity to a western lifestyle in certain ethnic groups . traditionally considered a disease of adults , type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes is increasingly diagnosed in children in parallel with rising obesity rates . type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes is now diagnosed as frequently as type & nbsp ; 1 diabetes in teenagers in the united states . rates of diabetes in 1985 were estimated at 30 & nbsp ; million , increasing to 135 & nbsp ; million in 1995 and 217 & nbsp ; million in 2005 . this increase is believed to be primarily due to the global population aging , a decrease in exercise , and increasing rates of obesity . the five countries with the greatest number of people with diabetes as of 2000 are india having 31.7 & nbsp ; million , china 20.8 & nbsp ; million , the united states 17.7 & nbsp ; million , indonesia 8.4 & nbsp ; million , and japan 6.8 & nbsp ; million . it is recognized as a global epidemic by the world health organization . . history . diabetes is one of the first diseases described with an egyptian manuscript from c . 1500 bce mentioning '' too great emptying of the urine . '' the first described cases are believed to be of type & nbsp ; 1 diabetes . indian physicians around the same time identified the disease and classified it as madhumeha or honey urine noting that the urine would attract ants . the term '' diabetes '' or '' to pass through '' was first used in 230 & nbsp ; bce by the greek apollonius memphites . the disease was rare during the time of the roman empire with galen commenting that he had only seen two cases during his career . type & nbsp ; 1 and type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes were identified as separate conditions for the first time by the indian physicians sushruta and charaka in 400–500 & nbsp ; ad with type & nbsp ; 1 associated with youth and type & nbsp ; 2 with being overweight . effective treatment was not developed until the early part of the 20th century when the canadians frederick banting and charles best discovered insulin in 1921 and 1922 . this was followed by the development of the long acting nph insulin in the 1940s . in 1916 , elliot joslin proposed that in people with diabetes , periods of fasting are helpful . subsequent research has supported this , and weight loss is a first line treatment in type 2 diabetes .