William Shield

life and musical career . shield was born in swalwell near gateshead , county durham , the son of william shield and his wife , mary , née cash . he was first taught music by his father but , after both he and his mother died while shield was still a child , he was apprenticed to a shipbuilder in south shields , continuing however to study music with charles avison in newcastle upon tyne . he became a noted violinist in newcastle 's subscription concerts before moving to scarborough to lead a theatre orchestra . in 1772 , he was appointed by felice giardini to play violin in the opera at covent garden ( now the royal opera house ) , and from 1773 he was principal viola there . on 21 february 1776 he was in durham , where he attended the meeting of the city 's masonic lodge at the marquis of granby tavern . the lodge minutes indicate that he was by this date already a member of the st . john 's lodge in newcastle . he later also became a member of the sunderland phoenix lodge . details of the frequency of shield 's attendance at these north-east lodges is not yet clear , but can only have been occasional , given his career in london . see simon fleming , 'harmony and brotherly love : musicians and freemasonry in 18th-century durham city ' , the musical times , 2008 ( autumn ) , 69–80 , at p . 78 . shield also worked as a composer for covent garden and , in that capacity , he met joseph haydn . in 1817 , he was appointed master of the queen 's music . like haydn , not to mention several other composers of his time , shield was a great plunderer of folk tunes ( in his case mostly from his native northumbria ) . shield 's compositions include a large number of operas and other stage works . for an extended listing of shield 's operas see margaret ross griffel , operas in english : a dictionary revised edition ( scarecrow press , 2012 ) , pp . 748ff . read here . for discussions of his partnerships with various librettists , see theodore fenner , opera in london : views of the press , 1785-1830 ( siu press , 1994 ) , passim . view here these included one on robin hood ( 1784 ) , text by macnally , as well as instrumental music , but he is principally known for his english light opera rosina ( 1781 ) . it was intended to be used as a light afterpiece to a more '' serious '' work sung in italian . such works were common at the time , although rosina is the only one that has survived in the form of a complete score . rosina has a number of features associated with later english comic opera , and even modern musical comedy – including the use of english , spoken dialogue , lightness of theme , and the use of folk and popular medodies . at least to that degree , it may be regarded as one of the ancestors of the musical , and shield as one of the first composers of musicals . death and subsequent historical problems . william shield died on sunday 25 january 1829 ( the date celebrated as robbie burns day ) at his house at 31 berners street , london . his will ( dated 29 june 1826 ) left his worldly goods and a glowing testimonial '' to my beloved partner , ann , mrs . shield '' . victorian chroniclers skirted round the problem , but when the will was proved on 6 march 1829 the estate was claimed by , '' ann stokes , alias shield , spinster , belonging to marleybone . ” his favourite violin was given to king george iv , who insisted that the full value be given to ann . within six months she also sold his library of music , but nothing more is known of her . shield is buried in the same grave as johann peter salomon in the floor of the south cloisters of westminster abbey . surprisingly , it seems no marker of any kind was put in place at the time to show where he lay . there was quite a search made near the centenary of his death and eventually a small marble tablet was put as near the grave as could be ascertained . john 'mad jack ' fuller commissioned sculptor peter rouw ( 1771–1852 ) , of portland lane , london , to create a memorial to mark the grave of his friend william shield in westminster abbey . dr ireland , dean of the abbey , is said to have refused permission for the tablet to be installed as he took objection to the word '' gentleman '' being used in its text . fuller subsequently had the tablet installed at his home church , st thomas à becket , brightling , sussex where it remains . a medallion portrait of william shield in profile is accompanied by this inscription : sacred to the memory of / william shield esquire / master of his majesty 's band of music / who died january 25th 1829 / aged 80 years / and is buried in westminster abbey / this gentleman 's name , independent / of his high character and virtues / in private life , has a claim to be enroll 'd / amongst the most eminent musical / composers that have hitherto prov 'd / an ornament to the british nation / john fuller of rose hill esq , ddd . it is presumed that the words , '' and is buried in westminster abbey '' were inserted . ddd is an abbreviation for the latin dat , dicat , dedicat which can be translated to '' gives , devotes and dedicates '' . a memorial cross was erected to honour shield in 1891 at whickham church , his native parish . near it is the oldest shield grave . '' here lieth peter shield and mary his wife , mother and children . dep this life april ye 8th 1747 . '' in december 2009 , gateshead council erected a memorial to william shield in swalwell , gateshead . it is close to the place where he was born , now a garage carrying out mots . in addition there is a room named the william shield room at the gateshead dryden centre , home of the gateshead schools music service . the gateshead youth orchestra regularly performs music by shield , including the overtures to rosina and the travellers in switzerland . the '' auld lang syne '' controversy . the most recent revival of the '' shield wrote auld lang syne '' story seems to date from 1998 , when john treherne , gateshead 's head of schools ' music service , uncovered an original edition of the opera rosina in the gateshead public library , while he was looking for new works for the town 's youth orchestra . '' i thought it was appropriate to look at the work of a gateshead-born composer . i picked out rosina by shield , '' treherne said . '' i started to copy out the score and hummed the tune as i was writing it down . i was coming to the end when i realised the tune floating through my head was auld lang syne . '' however , despite treherne 's observation , shield 's use of the 'old lang syne ' melody had already been thoroughly debated in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . the melody concerned ( which exists as a brief quotation near the end of the rosina overture ) has been claimed to be the source of the tune to robert burns ' famous song , and shield 's own composition . ballad operas generally quoted well known tunes , and in this case the tune is certainly much older . a fine and elaborate setting of an older tune with this name '' for old lang syne , by mr . beck '' , with variation appears in the balcarres lute book , from scotland . here attributions such as '' by mr . beck '' are generally used to indicate the composer of the setting , not the underlying tune . this book was compiled around 1700 , it has remained in the possession of the same family since its compilation , and it is now held by the national library of scotland . , . tune 106 '' for old lang syne , by mr . beck '' , recorded by rob mackillop . balcarres lute book , facsimile edition , ed . matthew spring , universities of glasgow and aberdeen , 2010 . as variation sets are generally composed on recognisable tunes , this is very probably older still . a later appearance of this old tune , was published by william mcgibbon , who died in 1756 . while both of these settings are on the earlier tune , the opening bars are immediately recognisable . probably the first printed appearances of the modern tune are first , shield 's use of it in rosina . in the final allegro , what is essentially the modern form of the tune appears on the oboe ; as this section contains scotch snap rhythms , with a drone accompaniment on bassoon 'in imitation of bagpipes ' , it may well be that the use of this melody by shield is also a quotation . shield does not claim it as his own , as he does with some of the song tunes in the opera . rosina premiered at the end of 1782 . in 1784 , niel gow published it , as sir alexander don 's strathpey , in his collection of strathspey reels . p.12 like shield , gow does not claim to have composed it ; it is closely related to older strathspeys such as coming through the rye , and the miller 's wedding . recordings . rosina ( only complete recording ) margreta elkins – the classic recordings abc 461 922-2 ( also includes sea pictures by edward elgar and '' the altar is adorned for the sacrifice '' by malcolm williamson ) . references . further reading . anon , 1830 . 'no . v . william shield ' , the annual biography and obituary for the year 1830 , vol 14 ( london : longman , rees , orme , brown and greene 1830 ) , pp . 86-103 . hauger , george , 1950 . 'william shield ' , music and letters vol . 31 no . 4 ( october 1950 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 337–342 . smith , peter , 2005 . from tyneside village to westminster abbey : the life , times and music of william shield , 1748-1829 . gateshead : gateshead schools ' music service . troost , linda . 2001 . '' shield , william '' . the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell . london : macmillan publishers . external links . further information on william shield editions by robert hoskins of shield works in the national library of new zealand