Richard Simon (priest)

early years . simon was born at dieppe . his early education took place at the oratorian college there , and a benefice enabled him to study theology at paris , where he showed an interest in hebrew and other semitic languages . he entered the oratorians as novice in 1662 . françois pouillon , dictionnaire des orientalistes de langue française ( 2008 ) , p . 900 ; google books . at the end of his novitiate he was sent to teach philosophy at the college of juilly . but he was soon recalled to paris , and employed in preparing a catalogue of the oriental books in the library of the oratory . conflicts as oratorian . simon was ordained a priest in 1670 . he then taught rhetoric at juilly until 1673 , having among his students the noted philosopher , count henri de boulainvilliers . israel , p . 566 . simon was influenced by the ideas of isaac la peyrère who came to live with the oratorians ( though taking little of the specifics ) , and by benedict spinoza . simon 's approach earned him the later recognition as a '' father of the higher criticism '' , though this title is also given to german writers of the following century , as well as to spinoza himself . richard henry popkin , isaac la peyrère ( 1596–1676 ) : his life , work , and influence ( 1987 ) , p . 87 ; google books . simon aroused ill will when he strayed into a legal battle . françois verjus was a fellow oratorian and friend who was acting against the benedictines of fécamp abbey on behalf of their commendatory abbot , the prince de neubourg . antoine augustin bruzen de la martinière , lettres choisies de m . simon ( 1730 ) , p . 25 ; google books . simon composed a strongly worded memorandum , and the monks complained to the abbé abel-louis de sainte-marthe , provost general of the oratory from 1672 . l'oratoire de france the charge of jesuitism was also brought against simon , on the grounds that his friend 's brother , father antoine verjus , was a prominent member of the society of jesus . suppression of the histoire critique . at the time of the printing of simon 's histoire critique du vieux testament , the work passed the censorship of the university of paris , and the chancellor of the oratory gave his imprimatur . simon hoped , through the influence of the jesuit priest , françois de la chaise , the king 's confessor , and charles de sainte-maure , duc de montausier , to be allowed to dedicate the work to king louis xiv of france ; but the king was absent in flanders . the freedom with which simon expressed himself , especially where he declared that moses could not be the author of much in the writings attributed to him , gained attention . the influence of jacques-benigne bossuet , at that time tutor to the dauphin of france , was invoked ; the chancellor , michael le tellier , lent his assistance . a decree of the royal council was obtained , and , after a series of intrigues , the whole printing , consisting of 1,300 copies , was seized by the police and destroyed . later life . the oratory then expelled simon ( 1678 ) . he retired in 1679 to the curacy of bolleville , seine-maritime . he later returned to dieppe , where much of his library was lost in the naval bombardment of 1694 . he died there on 11 april 1712 , at the age of seventy-four . works . most of what simon wrote in biblical criticism was not really new , given the work of previous critics such as louis cappel , johannes morinus , and others . in denying that moses wrote the entire pentateuch he followed abraham ben ezra . william mckane , selected christian hebraists ( 2005 ) , p . 114 ; google books . the jesuit tradition of biblical criticism starting with alfonso salmeron had paved the way for his approach . john w . o'malley , the jesuits : cultures , sciences , and the arts , 1540-1773 ( 1999 ) , p . 97 ; google books . . old testament . the histoire critique du vieux testament ( 1678 ) consists of three books . the first deals with the text of the hebrew bible and the changes which it has undergone , and the authorship of the mosaic writings and of other books of the bible . it presents simon 's theory of the existence during early jewish history of recorders or annalists of the events of each period , whose writings were preserved in the public archives . the second book gives an account of the main translations , ancient and modern , of the old testament . the third discusses biblical commentators . the book had a complicated early development . it appeared , with simon 's name on the title page , in the year 1685 , from the press of reinier leers in rotterdam . this dutch edition , in fact the second , superseded the suppressed french first edition , but differed from it in a number of ways . simon had hoped to overcome the opposition of bossuet by making changes ; these negotiations with bossuet lasted a considerable time , but finally broke down . the original french printer of the book , in order to promote sales , had the titles of the chapters printed separately and circulated . these had come into the hands of the port royalists , who had undertaken a translation into french of the prolegomena to brian walton 's polyglott . to counteract this , simon announced his intention of publishing an annotated edition of the prolegomena , and added to the histoire critique a translation of the last four chapters of that work , not part of his original plan . simon 's announcement prevented the appearance of the projected translation . a faulty edition of the histoire critique had previously been published at amsterdam by daniel elzevir , based on a manuscript transcription of one of the copies of the original work which had been sent to england ; and from which a latin translation ( historia critica veteris testamenti , 1681 , by noël aubert de versé ) israel , p . 576 . and an english translation ( critical history of the old testament , london , 1682 ) schaff-herzog article were made . the edition of leers was a reproduction of the work as first printed , with a new preface , notes , and those other writings which had appeared for and against the work up to that date ; it included simon 's answers to criticisms of charles de veil and friedrich spanheim the younger . richard henry popkin , james e . force , david s . katz , everything connects : in conference with richard h . popkin : essays in his honor ( 1999 ) , p . 41 ; google books . . new testament . in 1689 appeared simon 's companion histoire critique du texte du nouveau testament , consisting of thirty-three chapters . in it he discusses : the origin and character of the various books , with a consideration of the objections brought against them by the jews and others ; the quotations from the old testament in the new ; the inspiration of the new testament ( with a refutation of the opinions of spinoza ) ; the greek dialect in which they are written ( against c . salmasius ) ; and the greek manuscripts known at the time , especially codex bezae ( cantabrigiensis ) . there followed in 1690 his histoire critique des versions du nouveau testament , where he gives an account of the various translations , both ancient and modern , and discusses the way in which difficult passages of the new testament have been rendered in the various versions . in 1693 was published the histoire critique des principaux commentateurs du nouveau testament depuis le commencement du christianisme jusques a notre tems . nouvelles observations sur le texte et les versions du nouveau testament ( paris , 1695 ) contains supplementary observations on the subjects of the text and translations of the new testament . in 1702 simon published at trévoux his own translation into french of the new testament ( the version de trévoux ) . it was substantially based on the latin vulgate , but was annotated in such a way as to cast doubt on traditional readings that were backed by church authority . again bossuet did what he could to suppress the work . la-bible.net despite changes over two decades in how bossuet was able to exert influence through his circle of contacts , he again mobilised against simon beyond the boundaries of his diocese . fabrice preyat , le petit concile de bossuet et la christianisation des moeurs et des pratiques littéraires sous louis xiv ( 2007 ) , p . 252 ; google books . . other works . as a controversialist , simon tended to use pseudonyms , and to display bitterness . simon was early at odds with the port-royalists . antoine arnauld had compiled with others a work perpétuité de la foi ( on the perpetuity of the faith ) , the first volume of which dealt with the eucharist . after françois diroys , who knew both of them , had involved simon in commenting on the work , simon 's criticisms from 1669 aroused indignation in arnauld 's camp . 1902 britannica article on simon . fabrice preyat , le petit concile de bossuet et la christianisation des moeurs et des pratiques littéraires sous louis xiv ( 2007 ) , p . 119 ; google books . simon 's first major publication followed , his fides ecclesiae orientalis , seu gabrielis metropolitae philadelphiensis opuscula , cum interpretatione latina , cum notis ( paris , 1671 ) , on a work of ( 1541–1616 ) , the object of which was to demonstrate that the belief of the greek church regarding the eucharist was the same as that of the church of rome . in 1670 he had written a pamphlet in defence of the jews of metz , who had been accused of having murdered a christian child . simon published in 1675 a translation of the travels of girolamo dandini in lebanon , as voyage au mont liban ( 1675 ) . guy g . stroumsa , a new science : the discovery of religion in the age of reason ( 2010 ) , p . 183 note 9 ; google books . dandini was a perceptive observer , and simon in his preface argued for the utility of travel to theologians . stroumsa , p . 64 ; google books . in 1676 contacts with huguenots at charenton led simon to circulate a manuscript project for a new version of the bible . rens bod , jaap maat , thijs weststeijn , the making of the humanities : volume i : early modern europe , volume 1 ( 2011 ) , p . 345 note 18 ; google books . this was a sample for a proposed improved edition of the giovanni diodati translation ; but after simon had translated the pentateuch the funding ran out . magne saebo , hebrew bible , old testament : from the renaissance to the enlightenment 1300-1800 ( 2008 ) , p . 555 ; google books . . reception . the histoire critique du vieux testament encountered strong opposition from catholics who disliked simon 's diminishing of the authority of the church fathers . watson e . mills , mercer commentary on the new testament ( 2003 ) , p . 42 ; google books . protestants widely felt that an infallible bible was threatened by doubts which simon raised against the integrity of the hebrew text ; and indeed simon as basic tenets argued against sola scriptura david lyle jeffrey , gregory p . maillet , christianity and literature : philosophical foundations and critical practice ( 2011 ) , p . 221 ; google books . and in favour of the catholic church tradition of interpretation . jean le clerc , in his 1685 work sentimens de quelques théologiens de hollande , controverted the views of simon acutely , and claimed that an uninformed reader might take simon to be any of a calvinist , jew or crypto-spinozan ; bossuet made a point of banning this also , as even more harmful than simon 's book . israel , p . 100 and p . 452 it was answered in réponse aux sentimens de quelques théologiens de hollande by simon ( 1686 ) . in france , simon 's work became well known and widely circulated , despite bossuet 's hostility and efforts to keep it marginal . étienne fourmont was in effect a disciple of simon , if not acknowledging the fact . william johnstone , the bible and the enlightenment : a case study , dr . alexander geddes ( 1737–1802 ) ( 2004 ) , p . 89 ; google books . another orientalist influenced by simon was nicolas barat . an important eighteenth century biblical critic in france that did use simon 's work on the hebrew bible was jean astruc . richard h . popkin , isaac de la peyrère ( 1596–1676 ) : his life , work , and influence , leiden , e . j . brill , 1987 , p . 74 ; google books the identity of the translator of the 1682 english version critical history of the old testament is unclear , being often given as a henry dickinson who is an obscure figure , and sometimes as john hampden ; john dryden wrote his religio laici in response with a dedication to dickinson , and simon 's work became well known . isaac newton took an interest in simon 's new testament criticism in the early 1690s , pointed out to him by john locke , adding from it to an arian summary of his views that was intended for publication by le clerc , but remained in manuscript . richard s . westfall , never at rest : a biography of isaac newton ( 1983 ) , pp . 490–1 . later samuel clarke published his the divine authority of the holy scriptures asserted ( 1699 ) in reply to simon . simon 's works were later an influence on johann salomo semler . joel b . green , hearing the new testament : strategies for interpretation ( 1995 ) , p . 12 ; google books . pope leo xiii 's 1897 catalogue of condemned books contains several works by richard simon . bibliography . factum , servant de responce au livre intitulé abrégé du procéz fait aux juifs de mets , paris , 1670 . histoire critique du vieux testament , paris , 1678 ; a critical history of the old testament ( 1682 ) , available at archive.org . histoire critique du texte du nouveau testament ( rotterdam 1689 ) histoire critique des versions du nouveau testament , ibid . , 1690 ; r . simon , critical enquiries into the various editions of the bible ( 1684 ) histoire critique des principaux commentateurs du nouveau testament , ( rotterdam , chez reinier leers , 1693 ) . nouvelles observations sur le texte et les versions du nouveau testament , paris , 1695 . le nouveau testament de notre seigneur jésus-christ , traduit sur l ’ ancienne édition , avec des remarques littérales et critiques sur les principales difficultés , trévoux , 1702 , v . 4 . references . jonathan i . israel ( 2001 ) , radical enlightenment : philosophy and the making of modernity , 1650-1750 , new york : oxford university press . notes . further reading . for the life of simon : life or '' éloge '' by his grand-nephew de la martinière in vol . i . of the lettres choisies ( 4 vols . , amsterdam , 1730 ) . k . h . graf 's article in the first volume of the beiträge zu den theologischen wissenschaften , etc . ( jena , 1851 ) . e . w . e . reuss 's article , revised by e . nestle , in herzog-hauck , realencyklopädie ( ad . 1906 ) . richard simon et son histoire critique du vieux testament , by auguste bernus ( lausanne , 1869 ) . henri margival , essai sur richard simon et la critique biblique au xviie siècle ( 1900 ) . jean-pierre thiollet , je m'appelle byblos ( richard simon , pp . & nbsp ; 244–247 ) , paris , 2005 . external links . jewish encyclopedia article ; attribution