Radio clock

single transmitter . radio clocks synchronized to a terrestrial time signal can usually achieve an accuracy within a hundredth of a second relative to the time standard , generally limited by uncertainties and variability in radio propagation . some timekeepers , particularly watches such as some casio wave ceptors which are more likely than desk clocks to be used when travelling , can synchronise to any one of several different time signals transmitted in different regions . longwave and shortwave transmissions . radio clocks depend on coded time signals from radio stations . the stations vary in broadcast frequency , in geographic location , and in how the signal is modulated to identify the current time . in general , each station has its own format for the time code . list of radio time signal stations . descriptions a current list of times signal stations is published by the bipm as an appendix to their annual report ; the appendix includes coordinates of transmitter sites , operating schedules for stations , and the uncertainty of the carrier frequency of transmitters . bipm annual report on time activities 2010 , pages 85-93 , retrieved 2011 september 12 . bipm annual report on time activities – ftp : //ftp2.bipm.org/pub/tai/scale/timesignals/timesignals.pdf time signals , retrieved 2018 july 31 . many other countries can receive these signals ( jjy can sometimes be received in new zealand , western australia , tasmania , southeast asia , parts of western europe and the pacific northwest of north america at night ) , but success depends on the time of day , atmospheric conditions , and interference from intervening buildings . reception is generally better if the clock is placed near a window facing the transmitter . there is also a propagation delay of approximately for every the receiver is from the transmitter . clock receivers . a number of manufacturers and retailers sell radio clocks that receive coded time signals from a radio station , which , in turn , derives the time from a true atomic clock . one of the first radio clocks was offered by heathkit in late 1983 . their model gc-1000 '' most accurate clock '' received shortwave time signals from radio station wwv in fort collins , colorado . it automatically switched between wwv 's 5 , 10 , and 15 & nbsp ; mhz frequencies to find the strongest signal as conditions changed through the day and year . it kept time during periods of poor reception with a quartz-crystal oscillator . this oscillator was disciplined , meaning that the microprocessor-based clock used the highly accurate time signal received from wwv to trim the crystal oscillator . the timekeeping between updates was thus considerably more accurate than the crystal alone could have achieved . time down to the tenth of a second was shown on an led display . the gc-1000 originally sold for us 250 in kit form and us 400 preassembled , and was considered impressive at the time . heath company was granted a patent for its design . in the 2000s ( decade ) radio-based '' atomic clocks '' became common in retail stores ; as of 2010 prices start at around us 15 in many countries . radio controlled clock £19.95 clocks may have other features such as indoor thermometers and weather station functionality . these use signals transmitted by the appropriate transmitter for the country in which they are to be used . depending upon signal strength they may require placement in a location with a relatively unobstructed path to the transmitter and need fair to good atmospheric conditions to successfully update the time . inexpensive clocks keep track of the time between updates , or in their absence , with a non-disciplined quartz-crystal clock , with the accuracy typical of non-radio-controlled quartz timepieces . some clocks include indicators to alert users to possible inaccuracy when synchronization has not been recently successful . other broadcasts . ; attached to other broadcast stations : broadcast stations in many countries have carriers precisely synchronized to a standard phase and frequency , such as the bbc radio 4 longwave service on 198 & nbsp ; khz , and some also transmit sub-audible or even inaudible time-code information , like the radio france longwave transmitter on 162 & nbsp ; khz . attached time signal systems generally use audible tones or phase modulation of the carrier wave . ; teletext ( ttx ) : digital text pages embedded in television video also provide accurate time . many modern tv sets and vcrs with ttx decoders can obtain accurate time from teletext and set the internal clock . however the ttx time can vary up to 5 minutes . 100506 digitalspy.co.uk many digital radio and digital television schemes also include provisions for time-code transmission . ; digital terrestrial television : the dvb and atsc standards have 2 packet types that send time and date information to the receiver . digital television systems can equal gps stratum 2 accuracy ( with short term clock discipline ) and stratum 1 ( with long term clock discipline ) provided the transmitter site ( or network ) supports that level of functionality . ; vhf fm radio data system : rds can send a clock signal with sub-second precision but with an accuracy no greater than 100 ms and with no indication of clock stratum . not all rds networks or stations using rds send accurate time signals . the time stamp format for this technology is modified julian date ( mjd ) plus utc hours , utc minutes and a local time offset . ; l-band and vhf digital audio broadcasting : dab systems provide a time signal that has a precision equal to or better than digital radio mondiale but like fm rds do not indicate clock stratum . dab systems can equal gps stratum 2 accuracy ( short term clock discipline ) and stratum 1 ( long term clock discipline ) provided the transmitter site ( or network ) supports that level of functionality . the time stamp format for this technology is bcd . ; digital radio mondiale : drm is able to send a clock signal , but one not as precise as navigation satellite clock signals . drm timestamps received via shortwave ( or multiple hop mediumwave ) can be up to 200 ms off due to path delay . the time stamp format for this technology is bcd . gallery . analog radio clock in 201704.jpg a low frequency ( lf ) radio clock low cost dcf77 receiver.jpg lf time signal receiver junghans mega.jpg world 's first radio clock wrist watch , junghans mega ( analog model ) citizen attesa eco-drive atv53-3023 01.jpg citizen attesa eco-drive atv53-3023 analog-digital chronograph with 4 area radio controlled reception ( north america , europe , china , japan ) file : funkuhr.jpg radio controlled analog wall clock file : dcf77 controlled alarmclock.jpg radio controlled alarm clock file : bahnsteiguhr.jpg the dcf77 time signal is used by organizations like the deutsche bahn railway company to synchronize their station clocks . multiple transmitters . a radio clock receiver may combine multiple time sources to improve its accuracy . this is what is done in satellite navigation systems such as the global positioning system . gps , galileo and glonass satellite navigation systems have one or more caesium , rubidium or hydrogen maser atomic clocks on each satellite , referenced to a clock or clocks on the ground . dedicated timing receivers can serve as local time standards , with a precision better than 50 & nbsp ; ns . the recent revival and enhancement of loran , a land-based radio navigation system , will provide another multiple source time distribution system . gps clocks . many modern radio clocks use the global positioning system to provide more accurate time than can be obtained from terrestrial radio stations . these gps clocks combine time estimates from multiple satellite atomic clocks with error estimates maintained by a network of ground stations . due to effects inherent in radio propagation and ionospheric spread and delay , gps timing requires averaging of these phenomena over several periods . no gps receiver directly computes time or frequency , rather they use gps to discipline an oscillator that may range from a quartz crystal in a low-end navigation receiver , through oven-controlled crystal oscillators ( ocxo ) in specialized units , to atomic oscillators ( rubidium ) in some receivers used for synchronization in telecommunications . for this reason , these devices are technically referred to as gpsdos . gps units intended primarily for time measurement as opposed to navigation can be set to assume the antenna position is fixed . in this mode , the device will average its position fixes . after approximately a day of operation , it will know its position to within a few meters . once it has averaged its position , it can determine accurate time even if it can pick up signals from only one or two satellites . gps clocks provide the precise time needed for synchrophasor measurement of voltage and current on the commercial power grid to determine the health of the system . . astronomy timekeeping . although any satellite navigation receiver that is performing its primary navigational function must have an internal time reference accurate to a small fraction of a second , the displayed time is often not as precise as the internal clock . most inexpensive navigation receivers have one cpu that is multitasking . the highest-priority task for the cpu is maintaining satellite lock—not updating the display . multicore cpus for navigation systems can only be found on high end products . for serious precision timekeeping , a more specialized gps device is needed . some amateur astronomers , most notably those who time grazing lunar occultation events when the moon blocks the light from stars and planets , require the highest precision available for persons working outside large research institutions . the web site of the international occultation timing association international occultation timing association has detailed technical information about precision timekeeping for the amateur astronomer . daylight saving time . various of the formats above include a flag indicating the status of daylight saving time ( dst ) in the home country of the transmitter . this signal is typically used by clocks to adjust the displayed time to meet user expectations . see also . casio wave ceptor clock network speaking clock time from npl time transfer time synchronization in north america . references . external links . iota observers manual this manual from the international occultation timing association has very extensive details on methods of accurate time measurement . nist website : wwvb radio controlled clocks ntp project development website