Wikipedia:Emailing users

general information about the wikimedia email facility . if you have set an email address in your user preferences , you can exchange emails with other users through the wikipedia user interface . to do that , visit your correspondent 's user page and follow the '' email this user '' link in the '' toolbox '' on the left-side navigation menu . the email address you entered in your user preferences will appear as the '' from '' address of the mail , so the recipient will be able to reply . users who have openly disclosed their email addresses can be emailed directly . however , wikipedia does n't encourage such open disclosure . emailing users through wikipedia is a privacy feature that protects your email address from spam . wikipedia emails are sent immediately when you click on '' send '' . you can set your preferences so that you 'll also receive a copy of every email you send ; if you do n't choose this option , this can still be done for individual emails . it may be useful at times to leave a brief courtesy note on a recipient 's wp : tp that you 've sent them an email , as some users may not check their inbox regularly . a link to the email feature can be created in text or a signature by typing special : emailuser/ username . enabling and disabling user email . email is disabled unless you specify a verified email address . this can be done either while setting up your account , or in '' preferences '' , at any time . this is linked from the top-right of any page when you are logged in . if you are enabling your email , mediawiki requires verification that the email address belongs to you . it will send a confirmation email with a link inside . when you click the link , it will confirm your email address . the confirmation link expires after about a week . see help : email confirmation . once you have confirmed an email address , you may enable or disable email by visiting '' my preferences '' and checking or un-checking '' allow other users to email me '' . you can also prevent users without the autoconfirmed permissions level from emailing you by un-checking the '' allow emails from brand-new users '' preference . prohibiting email from specified users . if you have the email preference enabled , you can specify usernames which you do not want to be able to send you emails . these users will not see the '' email this user '' link on your user page and will see a standard error message when using special : emailuser as if your entire email preference has been disabled . emails triggered by watchlist and notifications are not affected by this preference . reposting emails publicly . : see also : wikipedia : harassment private correspondence there is no formal consensus by the community at this time regarding the reposting of private off-wiki correspondence to wikipedia 's public pages . however it is often likely to be unacceptable for legal reasons . unlike edits and posts to wikipedia 's web pages , emails sent through the email facility are not automatically wp : license by the sender , and therefore reposting would suggest to the world that the text is freely licensed for reuse and republication by its author , which is generally not the case . users who feel they are allowed to repost text from an email ( or other off-wiki source ) , or that it is right to do so , are advised to take caution and consult beforehand , to ensure they do not accidentally create a problem for themselves or a negative perception by doing so . this might involve consulting , or asking the sender if they will allow the email to be quoted under wikipedia 's license in a post on wikipedia 's discussion pages . note that this only applies to reposting on wikipedia and its sister sites – other forms of quoting which do not involve risk of copyright breach ( such as forwarding the text to an administrator for advice , or quoting words or brief phrases in a way that constitutes fair use ) are generally unaffected by this concern . privacy issues and protecting personal information . sending an email via the special : emailuser system will disclose your email address for the purposes of a reply , but no other information will be provided by the system to the recipient . ( note that emails sent this way are private – they are sent as written , as a private communication between willing parties who have agreed to send and receive emails . ) if you receive an email via this feature , you do not have to reply , or you may reply on the user 's talk page if you wish . replying may be done in three ways : by replying with your email client this will disclose whatever information your emails usually contain , including your email address . it may contain your ip address , or a signature line , or time zone , or the like . by visiting the wp : up of the sender , and using '' email this user '' yourself this will disclose nothing except your email address . you can do this by visiting the sender 's user page ( their name will appear in the header or footer of the email ) , then selecting '' email this user '' from the '' toolbox '' on the left of the page . by leaving them an on-wiki reply in some cases you may wish to leave a note on their wikipedia talk page for example to say the email was received , or a brief reply . since emails are usually sent as a private communication , it is often courteous to keep an on-wiki reply as brief and non-privacy breaching as possible , since the sender will usually expect a private reply . abuse handling . if you receive an objectionable email through this system , you should contact an wp : admin , possibly by email , to ask advice . in serious cases you may wish to escalate the matter , especially if there is a pattern of wp : harass involved . please note the following : do not post the email on-wiki without permission you should not post the email itself on the wiki without permission ( although you can describe briefly in summary what it contains or shows ) . this is partly due to copyright concerns , given that wikipedia pages can be re-used by anyone . for information on posting emails on wikipedia in general , see wp : postemail . you can prevent specific users from emailing you see prohibiting email from specified users for instructions . email can be disabled at any time see enabling and disabling user email for instructions . retain objectionable emails in case they are needed you may need to refer to them again . at a minimum , consider saving the email header and text for future reference . do not disclose any personal information disallowed on wikipedia posting real names or email addresses not previously and voluntarily disclosed on wikipedia can be considered outing . such information may be communicated privately to the arbitration committee . see also . general email information email email privacy wikipedia pages related to email functionality template : email user mediawiki : emailuserfooter - the footer that is added to all emails from this site - lists some key mediawiki system messages relating to email wp : postemail , policy discussing the issue of posting emails and other private correspondence on wikipedia , particularly : a 2007 arbcom decision on private correspondence wikipedia : private correspondence , a proposal rejected by the community in 2008 wikipedia : correspondence off-wiki , another proposal rejected in 2008