Calmodulin

structure . calmodulin is a small , highly conserved protein that is 148 amino acids long ( 16.7 kda ) . the protein has two approximately symmetrical globular domains ( the n- and c- domains ) each containing a pair of ef hand motifs separated by a flexible linker region for a total of four ca 2+ binding sites , two in each globular domain . in the ca 2+ -free state , the helices that form the four ef-hands are collapsed in a compact orientation , and the central linker is disordered ; in the ca 2+ -saturated state , the ef-hand helices adopt an open orientation roughly perpendicular to one another , and the central linker forms an extended alpha-helix in the crystal structure , but remains largely disordered in solution . the c-domain has a higher binding affinity for ca 2+ than the n-domain . calmodulin is structurally quite similar to troponin c , another ca 2+ -binding protein containing four ef-hand motifs . however , troponin c contains an additional alpha-helix at its n-terminus , and is constitutively bound to its target , troponin i . it therefore does not exhibit the same diversity of target recognition as does calmodulin . importance of flexibility in calmodulin . calmodulin ’ s ability to recognize a tremendous range of target proteins is due in large part to its structural flexibility . in addition to the flexibility of the central linker domain , the n- and c-domains undergo open-closed conformational cycling in the ca 2+ -bound state . calmodulin also exhibits great structural variability , and undergoes considerable conformational fluctuations , when bound to targets . moreover , the predominantly hydrophobic nature of binding between calmodulin and most of its targets allows for recognition of a broad range of target protein sequences . together , these features allow calmodulin to recognize some 300 target proteins exhibiting a variety of cam-binding sequence motifs . mechanism . binding of ca 2+ by the ef-hands causes an opening of the n- and c-domains , which exposes hydrophobic target-binding surfaces . these surfaces interact with complementary nonpolar segments on target proteins , typically consisting of groups of bulky hydrophobic amino acids separated by 10-16 polar and/or basic amino acids . the flexible central domain of calmodulin allows the protein to wrap around its target , although alternate modes of binding are known . “ canonical ” targets of calmodulin , such as myosin light-chain kinases and camkii , bind only to the ca 2+ -bound protein , whereas some proteins , such as nav channels and iq-motif proteins , also bind to calmodulin in the absence of ca 2+ . binding of calmodulin induces conformational rearrangements in the target protein via “ mutually induced fit ” , leading to changes in the target protein ’ s function . calcium binding by calmodulin exhibits considerable cooperativity , making calmodulin an unusual example of a monomeric ( single-chain ) cooperative-binding protein . furthermore , target binding alters the binding affinity of calmodulin toward ca 2+ ions , which allows for complex allosteric interplay between ca 2+ and target binding interactions . this influence of target binding on ca 2+ affinity is believed to allow for ca 2+ activation of proteins that are constitutively bound to calmodulin , such as small-conductance ca 2+ -activated potassium ( sk ) channels . . role in animals . calmodulin mediates many crucial processes such as inflammation , metabolism , apoptosis , smooth muscle contraction , intracellular movement , short-term and long-term memory , and the immune response . calcium participates in an cell signaling system by acting as a diffusible second messenger to the initial stimuli . it does this by binding various targets in the cell including a large number of enzymes , ion channels , aquaporins and other proteins . calmodulin is expressed in many cell types and can have different subcellular locations , including the cytoplasm , within organelles , or associated with the plasma or organelle membranes , but it is always found intracellularly . many of the proteins that calmodulin binds are unable to bind calcium themselves , and use calmodulin as a calcium sensor and signal transducer . calmodulin can also make use of the calcium stores in the endoplasmic reticulum , and the sarcoplasmic reticulum . calmodulin can undergo post-translational modifications , such as phosphorylation , acetylation , methylation and proteolytic cleavage , each of which has potential to modulate its actions . specific examples . . role in smooth muscle contraction . calmodulin plays an important role in excitation contraction coupling and the initiation of the cross-bridge cycling in smooth muscle , ultimately causing smooth muscle contraction . in order to activate contraction of smooth muscle , the head of the myosin light chain must be phosphorylated . this phosphorylation is done by myosin light-chain kinase . this mlc kinase is activated by a calmodulin when it is bound by calcium , thus making smooth muscle contraction dependent on the presence of calcium , through the binding of calmodulin and activation of mlc kinase . another way that calmodulin affects muscle contraction is by controlling the movement of ca 2+ across both the cell and sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes . the calcium channels , such as the ryanodine receptor of the sarcoplasmic reticulum , can be inhibited by calmodulin bound to calcium , thus affecting the overall levels of calcium in the cell . calcium pumps take calcium out of the cytoplasm or store it in the endoplasmic reticulum and this control helps regulate many downstream processes . this is a very important function of calmodulin because it indirectly plays a role in every physiological process that is affected by smooth muscle contraction such as digestion and contraction of arteries ( which helps distribute blood and regulate blood pressure ) . . role in metabolism . calmodulin plays an important role in the activation of phosphorylase kinase , which ultimately leads to glucose being cleaved from glycogen by glycogen phosphorylase . calmodulin also plays an important role in lipid metabolism by affecting calcitonin . calcitonin is a polypeptide hormone that lowers blood ca 2+ levels and activates g protein cascades that leads to the generation of camp . the actions of calcitonin can be blocked by inhibiting the actions of calmodulin , suggesting that calmodulin plays a crucial role in the activation of calcitonin . . role in short-term and long-term memory . ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase ii ( camkii ) plays a crucial role in a type of synaptic plasticity known as long-term potentiation ( ltp ) which requires the presence of calcium/calmodulin . camkii contributes to the phosphorylation of an ampa receptor which increases the sensitivity of ampa receptors . furthermore , research shows that inhibiting camkii interferes with ltp . . role in plants . while yeasts have only a single cam gene , plants and vertebrates contain an evolutionarily conserved form of cam genes . the difference between plants and animals in ca 2+ signaling is that the plants contain an extended family of the cam in addition to the evolutionarily conserved form . calmodulins play an essential role in plant development and adaptation to environmental stimuli . calcium plays a key role in the structural integrity of the cell wall and the membrane system of the cell . however , high calcium levels can be toxic to a plant 's cellular energy metabolism and , hence , the ca 2+ concentration in the cytosol is maintained at a submicromolar level by removing the cytosolic ca 2+ to either the apoplast or the lumen of the intracellular organelles . ca 2+ pulses created due to increased influx and efflux act as cellular signals in response to external stimuli such as hormones , light , gravity , abiotic stress factors and also interactions with pathogens . cmls ( cam-related proteins ) . plants contain cam-related proteins ( cmls ) apart from the typical cam proteins . the cmls have about 15 % amino acid similarity with the typical cams . arabidopsis thaliana contains about 50 different cml genes which leads to the question of what purpose these diverse ranges of proteins serve in the cellular function . all plant species exhibit this diversity in the cml genes . the different cams and cmls differ in their affinity to bind and activate the cam-regulated enzymes in vivo . the cam or cmls are also found to be located in different organelle compartments . plant growth and development . in arabidopsis , the protein dwf1 plays an enzymatic role in the biosynthesis of brassinosteroids , steroid hormones in plants that are required for growth . an interaction occurs between cam and dwf1 , and dwf1 being unable to bind cam is unable to produce a regular growth phenotype in plants . hence , cam is essential for the dwf1 function in plant growth . cam binding proteins are also known to regulate reproductive development in plants . for instance , the cam-binding protein kinase in tobacco acts as a negative regulator of flowering . however , these cam-binding protein kinase are also present in the shoot apical meristem of tobacco and a high concentration of these kinases in the meristem causes a delayed transition to flowering in the plant . s-locus receptor kinase ( srk ) is another protein kinase that interacts with cam . srk is involved in the self-incompatibility responses involved in pollen-pistil interactions in brassica . cam targets in arabidopsis are also involved in pollen development and fertilization . ca 2+ transporters are essential for pollen tube growth . hence , a constant ca 2+ gradient is maintained at the apex of pollen tube for elongation during the process of fertilization . similarly , cam is also essential at the pollen tube apex , where its primarily role involves the guidance of the pollen tube growth . interaction with microbes . . nodule formation . ca 2+ plays a significantly important role in nodule formation in legumes . nitrogen is an essential element required in plants and many legumes , unable to fix nitrogen independently , pair symbiotically with nitrogen-fixing bacteria that reduce nitrogen to ammonia . this legume-rhizobium interaction establishment requires the nod factor that is produced by the rhizobium bacteria . the nod factor is recognized by the root hair cells that are involved in the nodule formation in legumes . ca 2+ responses of varied nature are characterized to be involved in the nod factor recognition . there is a ca 2+ flux at the tip of the root hair initially followed by repetitive oscillation of ca 2+ in the cytosol and also ca 2+ spike occurs around the nucleus . dmi3 , an essential gene for nod factor signaling functions downstream of the ca 2+ spiking signature , might be recognizing the ca 2+ signature . further , several cam and cml genes in medicago and lotus are expressed in nodules . pathogen defense . among the diverse range of defense strategies plants utilize against pathogens , ca 2+ signaling is very increasingly common . free ca 2+ levels in the cytoplasm increases in response to a pathogenic infection . ca 2+ signatures of this nature usually activate the plant defense system by inducing defense-related genes and the hypersensitive cell death . cams , cmls and cam-binding proteins are some of the recently identified elements of the plant defense signaling pathways . several cml genes in tobacco , bean and tomato are responsive to pathogens . cml43 is a cam-related protein that , as isolated from apr134 gene in the disease-resistant leaves of arabidopsis for gene expression analysis , is rapidly induced when the leaves are inoculated with pseudomonas syringae . these genes are also found in tomatoes ( solanum lycopersicum ) . the cml43 from the apr134 also binds to ca 2+ ions in vitro which shows that cml43 and apr134 are , hence , involved in the ca 2+ -dependent signaling during the plant immune response to bacterial pathogens . the cml9 expression in arabidopsis thaliana is rapidly induced by phytopathogenic bacteria , flagellin and salicylic acid . expression of soybean scam4 and scam5 in transgenic tobacco and arabidopsis causes an activation of genes related to pathogen resistance and also results in enhanced resistance to a wide spectrum of pathogen infection . the same is not true for soybean scam1 and scam2 that are highly conserved cam isoforms . the atbag6 protein is a cam-binding protein that binds to cam only in the absence of ca 2+ and not in the presence of it . atbag6 is responsible for the hypersensitive response of programmed cell death in order to prevent the spread of pathogen infection or to restrict pathogen growth . mutations in the cam binding proteins can lead to severe effects on the defense response of the plants towards pathogen infections . cyclic nucleotide-gated channels ( cngcs ) are functional protein channels in the plasma membrane that have overlapping cam binding sites transport divalent cations such as ca 2+ . however , the exact role of the positioning of the cngcs in this pathway for plant defense is still unclear . abiotic stress response in plants . change in intracellular ca 2+ levels is used as a signature for diverse responses towards mechanical stimuli , osmotic and salt treatments , and cold and heat shocks . different root cell types show a different ca 2+ response to osmotic and salt stresses and this implies the cellular specificities of ca 2+ patterns . in response to external stress cam activates glutamate decarboxylase ( gad ) that catalyzes the conversion of -glutamate to gaba . a tight control on the gaba synthesis is important for plant development and , hence , increased gaba levels can essentially affect plant development . therefore , external stress can affect plant growth and development and cam are involved in that pathway controlling this effect . plant examples . . sorghum . the plant sorghum is well established model organism and can adapt in hot and dry environments . for this reason , it is used as a model to study calmodulin 's role in plants . sorghum contains seedlings that express a glycine-rich rna-binding protein , sbgrbp . this particular protein can be modulated by using heat as a stressor . its unique location in the cell nucleus and cytosol demonstrates interaction with calmodulin that requires the use of ca 2+ . by exposing the plant to versatile stress conditions , it can cause different proteins that enable the plant cells to tolerate environmental changes to become repressed . these modulated stress proteins are shown to interact with cam . the cambp genes expressed in the sorghum are depicted as a “ model crop ” for researching the tolerance to heat and drought stress . arabidopsis . in an arabidopsis thaliana study , hundreds of different proteins demonstrated the possibility to bind to cam in plants . . family members . calmodulin 1 calm2 calm3 calm1p1 calml3 calml4 calml5 calml6 . other calcium-binding proteins . calmodulin belongs to one of the two main groups of calcium-binding proteins , called ef hand proteins . the other group , called annexins , bind calcium and phospholipids such as lipocortin . many other proteins bind calcium , although binding calcium may not be considered their principal function in the cell .