Robot (camera)

clockwork cameras . robot i . around 1930 heinz kilfitt , a trained watchmaker , designed a new 35 & nbsp ; mm film compact camera using a 24×24 & nbsp ; mm frame format ( instead of the leica 24×36 & nbsp ; mm or cine 18×24 & nbsp ; mm formats ) . the 24×24mm square frame provided many advantages , including allowing over 50 exposures per standard roll of leica film instead of 36 . kodak and agfa rejected the design , and it was sold to hans berning , who set up the otto berning firm . otto berning was granted its first robot patent in 1934 ; a us patent was granted in 1936 . see '' heinz kilfitt - photographic camera , 1936 ( robot camera ) '' on this page for kilfitt 's us patent of '' a photographic camera in which the feed of the film is effected automatically by a spring mechanism '' the camera was originally intended to come in two versions : robot i , without motor , and robot ii with a spring motor . its release was delayed and already the first camera '' robot i '' included its hallmark spring motor . the first production cameras had a stainless steel body , a spring drive that could shoot 4 frames per second , and a rotary shutter with speeds from 1 to 1/500th second . the camera used proprietary '' type k '' cartridges , not the now-standard 35 & nbsp ; mm cartridges introduced in the same year by kodak 's dr . august nagel kamerawerk for the retina . the camera does not have a rangefinder , as it was designed for use mostly with short focal length lenses ( e.g . 40 & nbsp ; mm ) with great depth of field . the robot i was quite small , the body measuring 4¼ inches long , 2½ inches high , and 1¼ inches deep . a very sharp zone-focusing f/2.8 , 3.25 & nbsp ; cm zeiss tessar lens added 1/2 inch to the camera depth . it was about the size of the much later olympus stylus although it weighed about 20 ounces , approximately the weight of a modern slr . the die-cast zinc and stamped stainless steel body was crammed with clockwork . a spring motor on the top plate provided the driving force for a rotary behind-the-lens shutter and a sprocket film drive . the film was loaded into cassettes in a darkroom or changing bag . the cassettes appear to be based on the agfa memo cassette design , the now-standard kodak 35 & nbsp ; mm cassette not yet being popular in germany . in place of the velvet light trap on modern cassettes , the robot cassette used spring pressure and felt pads to close the film passage . when the camera back was shut , the compression opened the passage and the film could travel freely from one cassette to another . the rotary shutter and the film drive are like those used in cine cameras . when the shutter release is pressed , a light-blocking shield lifts and the shutter disc rotates a full turn exposing the film through its open sector ; when the pressure is released the light-blocking shield returns to its position behind the lens , and the spring motor advances the film and recocks the shutter . this is almost instantaneous . with practice a photographer could take 4 or 5 pictures a second . each winding of the spring motor was good for about 25 pictures , half a roll of film . shutter speed was determined by spring tension and mechanical delay since the exposure sector was fixed . the robot i had an exposure range of 1 to 1/500 , and provision for time exposures . the camera had other features not specifically related to action photography . the small optical viewfinder could be rotated 90 degrees to permit pictures to be taken in one direction while the photographer was facing in another . when the viewfinder was rotated , the scene was viewed through a deep purple filter similar to those used by cinematographers to judge the black and white contrast of an image . the camera had a built-in deep yellow filter which could be positioned behind the lens . robot ii . in 1938 berning introduced the robot ii , a slightly larger camera with some significant improvements but still using the basic mechanism . among the standard lenses were a 3 & nbsp ; cm zeiss tessar and a 3.75 & nbsp ; cm zeiss tessar in f/2.8 and 3.5 variations , a f/2.0 , 40 & nbsp ; mm zeiss biotar and f/4 , 7.5 & nbsp ; cm zeiss sonnar . the film cassette system was redesigned , and the 1951 iia accepted a standard 35 & nbsp ; mm cassette . the special robot cassettes type-n continued to be used for take-up . a small bakelite box was sold to allow colour film to be rewound into the original cassettes as required by film processing companies . the camera was synchronized for flash . the swinging viewfinder was retained , but now operated by a lever rather than moving the entire housing . both the deep purple and yellow filters were eliminated in the redesign . some versions were available with a double-wind motor which could expose 50 frames on one winding . civilian versions of the robot were discontinued at the outset of the second world war , but it was used as a bomb damage assessment camera by the luftwaffe , mounted in the tail of ju87 ( stuka ) dive bombers . this was an electrically driven camera using large cassettes possibly as large as 300 24 x 24mm images . unlike the central leica 250gg camera in the ju87 , which was switched on automatically when the dive brakes were applied , the robot camera had to be switched on manually . in the stress of the automatic pull out , when it was not uncommon for the pilot to black out from the g levels , switching on the bomb damage assessment camera was frequently forgotten . robot royal . robot royal model ii . robot royal ii is a viewfinder camera , it has no rangefinder , it does not have burst mode , it is a stripped down robot royal iii . robot royal model iii . robot royal iii has a main spring , when tightened , the camera can take 4 to 5 pictures in succession . it has a built in rangefinder , eight interchangeable bayonet mount lenses . there are two versions , robot royal 36 , produce 36 24x36mm images on a roll of 135 film , robot royal 24 makes 50 24x24mm images on 135 film . robot star . in the 1950s robot introduced the robot star . film could now be rewound into the feed cassette in the camera as in other 35 & nbsp ; mm cameras . robot then introduced the '' junior '' , an economy model with the quality and almost all the features of the '' star '' but without the angle finder or the rewind mechanism . in the late 1950s the company , now called robot-berning , redesigned the robot star and created the vollautomat star ii . the length stayed the same but the height increased by half an inch . the new higher top housing disposed of the right angle finder and instead included an albada finder with frames for the factory-fitted 38/40 & nbsp ; mm and 75 & nbsp ; mm lenses . the drive and shutter too were improved . by 1960 the hallmark stamped steel body was replaced by heavier die castings . the camera became , with slight changes , the robot star 25 and star 50 . the robot star 25 could expose 25 frames on a single winding , and the double-motor robot star 50 could expose 50 frames . since most robot cameras by then were sold for industrial use where the camera was fixed in position , robot also introduced versions without a finder , and even without rewind . although most production dates from the 1950-1960s era , essentially the same camera continued to be manufactured into the late 1990s . during the cold war , robots had a large following in the espionage business . the small camera could be concealed in a briefcase or a handbag , the lens poking though a decorative hole , and activated repeatedly by a cable release concealed in the handle . the company was well aware of this market and produced a variety of accessories which made the camera even more suitable for covert photography . robot-berning also produced enlarged versions of the robot , the robot royal 18 , 24 and 36 , with built-in rangefinder and with an autoburst mode of operation capable of shooting 6 frames per second . the camera was about the size of a leica m3 and weighed almost 2 pounds . it was equipped with a schneider xenar 45 & nbsp ; mm f/2.8 lens . the robot royal 36 took a standard 35 & nbsp ; mm still picture but was identical to the royal 24 in all other regards . they retained the behind-the-lens rotary shutter with speeds from 1/2 to 1/500 s . a version for instrumentation ( and traffic ) was also created on the basis of the royal design : the recorder . these cameras were like the royal but without viewfinder or rangefinder . they had interfaces to motors and detachable backs to support bulk film cassettes . a special parallel series of the royal too was available that included these features . while the royal had only limited market success , the recorder was well accepted . it became the centerpiece of the company 's portable document capture , traffic control and security solutions , and continues to be the standard robot camera for instrumentation applications . while the robots were capable of sequence photography , the shutter that made this possible placed some constraints upon taking lenses and shutter speeds . to reach speeds as high as 1/500 second the inertia of the thin vulcanite shutter disc had to be kept at a minimum , requiring a small-diameter disc with a minimal sector opening . the screw in lens mount was 26 & nbsp ; mm in diameter . the clear lens opening was only 20 & nbsp ; mm . in contrast , leica 's mount was almost twice as large at 39 & nbsp ; mm . further , to permit lens interchangeability , the shutter was mounted behind the lens so the disc interrupted the expanding light cone . this placed some limits on lens design . while the 75mm & nbsp ; sonnar could be used with the aperture set to f/22 , the tele-xenar suffered from some shutter disc vignetting unless opened more . the maximum focal length lens for general photographic use that could be fitted with acceptable vignetting was 75 & nbsp ; mm , although telephotos up to 600 & nbsp ; mm were offered . a 150 & nbsp ; mm tele-xenar was available for long-distance action photography , but it produced a vignetted circular image on the 24 × 24 & nbsp ; mm frame . the lack of a rangefinder on the robot and robot star required zone focusing of these long lenses : every shot had to be estimated or premeasured . all of the mechanical movement made for a noisy camera , although not as noisy as some modern motor drives . for an extra fee , robot-berning supplied silenced versions with nylon gears . within their limits the robots did an excellent job of sequence photography . the standard 38 & nbsp ; mm f/2.8 xenar lenses were extremely sharp , even by today 's standards , and zone focusing worked well on rapid action with short focal length lenses . the reliable motor drive was as fast , if not faster , than later electrical drives , and there were no batteries to run down . flash could be used at any speed . the square frame was big enough , with modern films , for 8 × 10 '' or greater enlargements , and 50 pictures could be taken on a standard 36-exposure roll . the cameras , especially the later ones built to industrial standards , will take much abuse and still keep functioning . robot luftwaffen eigentum . otto berning made a robot camera specially for german airforce -- the robot luftwaffen eigentum . references . robot 1 . external links . heinz kilfitt - biographical notes