Áedán mac Gabráin

sources . the sources for áedán 's life include bede 's historia ecclesiastica gentis anglorum ; irish annals , principally the annals of ulster and the annals of tigernach ; and adomnán 's life of saint columba . the senchus fer n-alban , a census and genealogy of dál riata , purports to record his ancestry and that of his immediate descendants . none of these sources are contemporary . adomnán 's work was written in the very late 7th century , probably to mark the centenary of columba 's death . it incorporates elements from a lost earlier life of columba , de virtutibus sancti columbae , by cumméne find . this may have been written as early as 640 ; neither the elements incorporated from cumméne 's work nor adomnán 's own writings can be treated as simple history . bede 's history was written 30 years after adomnán 's . the surviving irish annals contain elements of a chronicle kept at iona from the middle of the 7th century onwards , so that these too are retrospective when dealing with áedán 's time . hughes ; bannerman ; fraser . the rawlinson b 502 manuscript , dated to c . 1130 , contains the tale gein branduib maic echach ocus aedáin maic gabráin ( the birth of brandub son of eochu and of aedán son of gabrán ) . in this story , áedán is the twin brother of brandub mac echach , a king of leinster who belonged to the uí cheinnselaig kindred . áedán is exchanged at birth for one of the twin daughters of gabrán , born the same night , so that each family might have a son . the prophecy of berchán also associates áedán with leinster . john bannerman concluded that '' there seems to be no basis of fact behind these traditions . '' bannerman , pp . 89–90 francis john byrne suggested that the echtra was written by a poet at the court of diarmait mac maíl na mbó , an 11th-century descendant of brandub , and was written to cement an alliance between diarmait and the scots king malcolm iii of scotland ( '' malcolm iii '' ) , who claimed to be a descendant of áedán . byrne , '' ireland and her neighbours '' , p . 897 . fraser , p . 296 , notes that '' the 'discovery ' of a genealogical link '' was a common result of an alliance . a lost irish tale , echtra áedáin mac gabráin ( the adventures of áedán son of gabrán ) , appears in a list of works , but its contents are unknown . macquarrie , p . 109 . the echtra áedáin mac gabráin is listed in áedán is a character in the epic scéla cano meic gartnáin , but the events which inspired the tale appear to have taken place in the middle of the 7th century . m.o . anderson , pp . 154–155 . macquarrie , pp . 167–170 , discusses the tale , describing it as a '' pseudo-historical romance '' . he also appears in the tale compert mongáin . wiley , dan m . ( 2004 ) '' the cycles of the kings : compert mongáin '' hastings college . retrieved 16 september 2009 . áedán additionally appears in a variety of welsh sources , making him one of the few non-britons to figure in welsh tradition . bromwich , p . 272 . welsh sources call him aedan bradawc , meaning '' the treacherous '' or '' the wily '' . he may have earned this epithet after the collapse of an alliance with rhydderch hael , king of the nearby brittonic kingdom of alt clut ; enmity between them is remembered in the welsh triads and elsewhere . bromwich , p . 272 , 494 . another triad records áedán 's host as one of the '' three faithful war-bands of the island of britain '' , as they '' went to the sea for their lord '' . bromwich , pp . 62-65 ; jones , p . 39 . though this triad , like the bonedd gwŷr y gogledd , flips father and son 's names as gauran map aedan , bromwich p . 64 takes it as a reference to áedán rather than his father . this may point to an otherwise lost tradition concerning one of áedán 's sea expeditions , such as to orkney or the isle of man . bromwich , p . 64 , 273 . additionally , several welsh works claim a brittonic pedigree for áedán . the bonedd gwŷr y gogledd records him as a descendant of dyfnwal hen of alt clut , though the genealogy is much confused ( gauran is given as his son , rather than father ) . bromwich , pp . 256–257 the cambro-latin de situ brecheniauc and cognacio brychan claim his mother was luan , daughter of brychan of brycheiniog in wales . though these pedigrees are inconsistent and likely dubious , they are notable in highlighting áedán 's close association with the britons . bromwich , pp . 272–273 . . neighbours . áedán was the chief king in dál riata , ruling over lesser tribal kings . the senchus fer n-alban records the sub-divisions of dál riata in the 7th and 8th centuries , but no record from áedán 's time survives . according to the senchus , dál riata was divided into three sub-kingdoms in the 7th century , each ruled by a kin group named for their eponymous founder . these were the cenél ngabráin , named for áedán 's father , who ruled over kintyre , cowal and bute ; the cenél loairn of northern argyll ; and the cenél nóengusa of islay . within these there were smaller divisions or tribes which are named by the senchus . bannerman , pp 47–49 and 108–118 ; charles-edwards , pp . 296–297 . details of the irish part of the kingdom are less clear . looking outward , dál riata 's neighbours in north britain were the picts and the britons of the hen ogledd , the brittonic-speaking parts of what is now northern england and southern lowland scotland . the most powerful brittonic kingdom in the area was alt clut , later known as strathclyde and cumbria . late in áedán 's life , the anglo-saxon kingdom of bernicia became the greatest power in north britain . an overview of the politics of northern britain can be found in , for example , yorke , pp . 33–97 . in ireland , dál riata formed part of ulster , ruled by báetán mac cairill of the dál fiatach . the other major grouping in ulster consisted of the disunited tribes of the cruithne , later known as the dál naraidi . the most important cruithne king in áedán 's time was fiachnae mac báetáin . beyond the kingdom of ulster , and generally hostile to it , were the various kingdoms and tribes of the uí néill and their subjects and allies . of the uí néill kings , áed mac ainmuirech of the cenél conaill , columba 's first cousin once removed , was the most important during áedán 's reign . see , for example , byrne , irish kings , pp . 106ff . ; charles-edwards , pp . 54–67 , 293–299 , & pp . 481ff . . reign . adomnán , the senchus fer n-alban and the irish annals record áedán as a son of gabrán mac domangairt ( died c . 555–560 ) . áedán 's brother eoganán is known from adomnán and his death is recorded c . 597 . adomnán , iii , 5 ; anderson , essh , p . 118 ; bannerman , p . 90 . the senchus names three other sons of gabrán , namely cuildach , domnall , and domangart . anderson , essh , p . cl ; bannerman , p . 48 . although nothing is known of cuildach and domangart or their descendants , adomnán mentions a certain ioan , son of conall , son of domnall , '' who belonged to the royal lineage of the cenél ngabráin '' , adomnán , ii , 22 . but this is generally read as meaning that ioan was a kinsman of the cenél ngabráin , and his grandfather named domnall is not thought to be the same person as áedán 's brother domnall . adomnán , ii , 22 , translator 's note 258 ; bannerman , p . 107 . áedán was about forty years old when he became king , following the death of his uncle conall mac comgaill in 574 . bannerman , p . 81 . his succession as king may have been contested ; adomnán states that columba had favoured the candidacy of áedán 's brother eoganán . adomnán , iii , 5 . adomnán claims that áedán was ordained as king by columba , the first example of an ordination known in britain and ireland . adomnán , iii , 5 and translator 's note 358 ; broun ; byrne , irish kings , p . 159 ; yorke , p . 241 . in 574 , following the account of conall 's death , the annals of ulster and the annals of tigernach record a battle in kintyre , called the battle of teloch , or delgu . the precise location of the battle is unidentified . the annals agree that '' dúnchad , son of conall , son of comgall , and many others of the allies of the sons of gabrán , fell . '' bannerman , pp . 81–82 ; anderson , essh , pp . 78–79 ; m.o . anderson , p . 149 , suggests that báetán mac cairill may have been the enemy against whom the battle was fought . in 575 , the annals of ulster report '' the great convention of druim cett '' , at mullagh or daisy hill near limavady , with áed mac ainmuirech and columba in attendance . anderson , essh , p . 79 . the date of druim cett has been disputed . sharpe , in the editor 's notes to adomnán 's life , note 204 , proposes a much later date , c . 590 . sharpe is followed by meckler ( '' the annals of ulster and the date of the meeting at druim cett '' , peritia , vol . 11 , 1997 ) but this is challenged by jaski ( '' druim cett revisited '' , peritia , vol . 12 , 1998 ) . charles-edwards , early christian ireland , p . 491 , takes the meeting to have been '' some years later '' than 575 . adomnán reports that áedán was present at the meeting . adomnán , i , 48 . the purpose of the meeting is not entirely certain , but one agreement made there concerned the status of áedán 's kingdom . áedán and áed agreed that while the fleet of dál riata would serve the uí néill , no tribute would be paid to them , and warriors would only be provided from the dál riata lands in ireland . anderson , essh , p . 83 , note 2 ; m.o . anderson , pp . 148–149 ; bannerman , pp . 1–2 ; byrne , irish kings , p . 110 . the reason for this agreement is thought to have been the threat posed to áedán , and also to áed , by báetán mac cairill . báetán is said to have forced the king of dál riata to pay homage to him at rosnaree on islandmagee . áedán is thought to be the king in question , and ulster sources say that báetán collected tribute from scotland . anderson , essh , pp.87–88 ; bannerman , pp . 2–4 ; byrne , irish kings , pp . 109–111 ; ó cróinín , early medieval ireland , pp . 50–51 . following báetán 's death in 581 , the ulstermen abandoned the isle of man , which they had captured in báetán 's time , perhaps driven out by áedán who is recorded as fighting there c . 583 . anderson , essh , p . 89 ; bannerman , pp . 83–84 ; ó cróinín , pp . 50–51 . earlier , c . 580 , áedán is said to have raided orkney , which had been subject to bridei i of the picts , king of the picts , at an earlier date . adomnán , ii , 42 , and translator 's note 324 ; anderson , essh , p . 86 ; bannerman , pp . 79 & 83 . áedán 's campaigns on the isle of man have sometimes been confused with the battle against the miathi mentioned by adomnán . the miathi appear to have been the maeatae , a tribe in the area of the upper river forth . this campaign was successful , but áedán 's sons artúr and eochaid find were killed in battle according to adomnán . adomnán , i , 8–9 and translator 's note 81 ; bannerman , pp . 82–83 . bannerman , pp . 90–91 , notes that artúr is the son of conaing , son of áedán in the senchus fer n-alban . this battle may have taken place c . 590 and been recorded as the battle of leithreid or leithrig . anderson , essh , p . 94 ; bannerman , pp . 84–85 and 91 . the prophecy of berchán says of áedán : '' thirteen years ( one after another ) he will fight against the pictish host ( fair the diadem ) . '' the only recorded battle between áedán and the picts appears to have been fought in circinn , in 599 or after , where áedán was defeated . the annals mention the deaths of his sons here . bannerman , pp . 84–86 . it has been suggested that this battle was confused with the '' battle of asreth '' in circinn , fought c . 584 , in which bridei son of maelchon was killed . this battle is described as being '' fought between the picts themselves '' . the battle of asreth is apparently misdated , appearing under 752 in the annals of tigernach ; see m.o . anderson , pp . 30–31 & 36–37 . a number of welsh traditions point to warfare between áedán and king rhydderch hael of alt clut , the northern brittonic kingdom later known as strathclyde . hector munro chadwick and subsequent historians suggest áedán was initially in a long-term alliance with rhydderch and his predecessors , but that it eventually collapsed into conflict . adomnán reports that rhydderch sent a monk named luigbe to iona to speak with columba '' for he wanted to learn whether he would be slaughtered by his enemies or not '' . a welsh triad names áedán 's plundering of alt clut as one of the '' three unrestrained plunderings of britain '' , and the poem peiryan vaban tells of a battle between áedán and rhydderch . adomnán , i , 15 and translator 's note 89 ; bannerman , pp . 88–89 . the lost irish epic orgain sratha cluada is usually thought to refer to the attack on alt clut in 870 by vikings , but macquarrie suggests that it may refer to an attack by áedán on rhydderch . macquarrie , p . 109 . . degsastan and after . degsastan appears not to have been the first battle between áedán and the bernicians . the death of his son domangart in the land of the saxons is mentioned by adomnán , and it is presumed that bran died in the same otherwise unrecorded battle . adomnán , i , 9 ; bannerman , pp . 85 and 91–92 . of the roots of this conflict , bede mentions only that áedán was alarmed by æthelfrith 's advance . wherever the battle of degsastan was fought , bede saw it as lying within northumbria . the battle was a decisive victory for æthelfrith , and bede says , carefully , that '' from that day until the present , no king of the irish in britain has dared to do battle with the english . '' although victorious , æthelfrith suffered losses ; bede tells us his brother theodbald was killed with all his following . theodbald appears to be called eanfrith in irish sources , which name his killer as máel umai mac báetáin of the cenél neógain , son of high-king báetán mac ninnedo . the irish poem compert mongáin says that the king of ulster , fiachnae mac báetáin of the dál naraidi , aided áedán against the saxons , perhaps at degsastan . the anglo-saxon chronicle mentions that hering , son of king hussa of bernicia , was present , apparently fighting with áedán . bede , i , 34 ; bannerman , pp.86–88 ; byrne , irish kings , p . 111 ; kirby , pp . 70–72 . macquarrie , pp . 103–104 , notes some textual inconsistencies in the irish sources , and suggests that the '' battle of the saxons '' recorded in the irish annals may not be bede 's '' battle of degsastan '' . after the defeat of degsastan , the annals report nothing of áedán until his death around six years later , perhaps on 17 april 609 , the date supplied by the martyrology of tallaght , composed c . 800 . the annals of tigernach give his age as 74 . bannerman , pp.80–81 ; fraser , caledonia to pictland , p . 141 . the prophecy of berchán places his death in kintyre and says '' he will not be king at the time of his death '' , while the 12th century acta sancti lasriani claims that he was expelled from the kingship . john of fordun , writing in the 14th century , believed that áedán had been buried at kilkerran in kintyre . bannerman , pp . 80–81 and 86–87 . . áedán 's descendants . áedán was succeeded by his son , eochaid buide . adomnán gives an account of columba 's prophecy that eochaid 's older brothers ( listed as artúr , eochaid find and domangart ) would predecease their father . adomnán , i , 9 . áedán 's other sons are named by the senchus fer n-alban as eochaid find , tuathal , bran , baithéne , conaing , and gartnait . the name conaing implies a familiarity with anglo-saxons and their language as it is derived from old english cyning , king ; byrne , irish kings , pp.111–112 . the appearance of two sons named eochaid is not an error , as noted by charles-edwards , p . 6 . adomnán also names artúr , called a son of conaing in the senchus , and domangart , who is not included in the senchus . domangart too may have been a grandson rather than a son of áedán , most likely another son of conaing . the main line of cenél ngabráin kings were the descendants of eochaid buide through his son domnall brecc , but the descendants of conaing successfully contested for the throne throughout the 7th century and into the 8th . adomnán , i , 9 ; anderson , essh , pp.95–96 ; bannerman , pp . 47–49 , 90–96 and 103 . it has been suggested that gartnait son of áedán could be the same person as gartnait ii , king of the picts , whose death is reported around 601 , but this rests on the idea of pictish matriliny , which has been criticised . even less certainly , it has been argued that gartnait 's successor in the pictish king-lists , nechtan , was his grandson , and thus áedán 's great-grandson . anderson , essh , pp . 121–123 and 145 ; bannerman , pp . 93–94 , smyth , p.70 . on pictish matriliny in general , see woolf . that the pictish king nechtan and nechtan son of cano are the same person is questionable : see m.o . anderson , pp . 116 & 154 ; macquarrie , pp . 167–170 . less is known of áedán 's daughters . maithgemm , also recorded as gemma , married a prince named cairell of the dál fiatach . the names of áedán 's wives are not recorded , but one was said to be brittonic , and another may have been a pictish woman named domelch , if indeed the gartnait son of domelch and gartnait son of áedán are one and the same . bannerman , pp . 88–89 . a daughter named conchenn is mentioned in the medieval glosses on the amra columcille . . notes . references . . external links . celt : corpus of electronic texts at university college cork includes : the gein branduib maic echach ocus aedáin maic gabráin , the scéla cano meic gartnáin , and irish annals , some with translations compert mongán translated by mary jones . artúr mac aedan of dalriada by michelle ziegler , the heroic age issue 1 , spring/summer 1999 scéla & nbsp ; – a catalogue of medieval irish narratives