Hubert Julian

early years . hubert fauntleroy julian was born in port of spain , trinidad , in 1897 . his father , henry , was a cocoa plantation manager in toco . julian caught his first glimpse of an airplane on 3 january 1913 , when frank boland performed an exhibition flight , ultimately crashing and dying . the shock of the crash stayed with julian who , after world war i , left his island home for canada . there , in november 1920 , he flew for the first time during a joyride with canadian flying ace billy bishop . shortly after this he designed and patented what was labeled an '' aeroplane safety appliance . '' . 1920s . in 1921 , julian left montreal for good and moved to harlem . once there he came under the influence of the charismatic marcus garvey and joined the universal negro improvement association . this new '' garveyvite '' soon adopted a new persona , rechristening himself '' lieutenant hubert julian '' of the royal canadian air force . julian had a tailor fashion for him a fake military uniform in order to push his new narrative . on 3 september 1922 , julian performed his first parachute jump at curtiss field on long island ; the event was headlined with a flight by bessie coleman . julian would make one more jump that year before teaming up with aviator clarence chamberlin who , in addition to teaching his new business partner how to truly handle an airplane , flew him up above harlem where the trinidadian parachuted several times , the most famous moment coming when he wore a crimson jumpsuit while playing '' runnin ' wild '' on a saxophone . this would be the stunt which caused h . allen smith to dub julian '' the black eagle of harlem '' . julian also parachuted over harlem while playing a gold-plated saxophone in october 1923 . in 1924 , julian , along with chamberlin , began toying with the idea of performing a transatlantic flight , with stops in florida , the west indies , central america , brazil , and saint paul 's rock ( in the mid-atlantic ) , from new york city to liberia . an old seaplane was purchased and refitted for the proposed flight ; julian dubbed it the ethiopia . on 4 july , with a crowd of thousands gathered at the banks of the harlem river to witness his takeoff , julian boarded his plane , after having unia members help raise some last-minute funds to pay off his investors , and soared into the sky . a few minutes would pass before julian realized that one of his plane 's pontoons had filled up with water , throwing the aircraft 's weight off balance . unable to regain control , julian crashed into flushing bay . julian would try twice more to pilot a transatlantic flight before the 1920s came to end . the first of these two attempts ended when his plane 's wings were vandalized by unknown assailants while they were being stored in happyland park . the second , and final , attempt saw new york state senator a . spencer feld take the helm of the endeavor , but after amelia earhart crossed the atlantic ocean , julian felt dismayed at the prospect of performing something that had now been done by more than a handful of others and canceled the project . . 1930s . during the first half of the 1930s , julian made three trips to the ethiopian empire . it was during his second visit when he crashed haile selassie 's favorite plane , causing the emperor to ask julian to leave his kingdom . but the black eagle would return on the eve of the second italo-ethiopian war , gaining a military commission to help defend the african kingdom . it was during this third trip when he would come to blows with john c . robinson , the brown condor of chicago , over jabs in the press which julian attributed to robinson . once it became clear that the forces of fascist italy would prevail , julian left the country . julian returned to ethiopia as a volunteer in the east african campaign of 1940-41 . julian spent his time stateside traveling with william powell 's five blackbirds , an all black flying troupe who performed in the midwest and california as well as performing piloting services for paying customers like father divine . he also embarked on a short-lived career as a film producer with the director oscar micheaux , helping to fund the distribution for two of micheaux 's films : lying lips and the notorious eleanor lee . . 1940s . during the winter war between finland and the soviet union , julian , along with many other american volunteers , left for finland in order to help provide assistance . he was there for several months without seeing action , before departing back for the united states . when julian learned , from giuseppe bellanca , what adolf hitler and hermann göring had been saying about peoples of color , the black eagle issued a challenge to the latter , offering the nazi leader the chance to duel him in an aerial battle above the english channel . goring never gave an official response to the challenge , but julian gained widespread praise for his bold verbal attacks . once the attack on pearl harbor thrust the united states into world war ii , julian , now in his 40s , enlisted into the military . he would serve less than a year , becoming an american citizen in the process , and earning an honorable discharge with the final rank of private first class . 1950s and 1960s . after the end of world war ii julian become a licensed arms dealer . his first contract was with the arbenz government of guatemala . he defied the fbi when , after being asked to cease his dealings , julian continued selling . his second contract was with the batista government of cuba as it tried , and ultimately failed , to combat fidel castro 's revolutionaries . his third , and final , contract was with moïse tshombe , leader of katanga during the congo secession crisis of the early 1960s . julian was detained by united nations forces for questioning and was in the end jailed for four months before being released . he retired upon his return to the united states . . later years and death . julian spent his retirement meeting the likes of muhammad ali and appearing on the merv griffin show and the tonight show . he died in 1983 and was buried at calverton national cemetery in suffolk county , new york . personal life . hubert julian was married three times . his first marriage , which lasted only a few years , was to edna powell . his second marriage , his longest , was to essie gittens , whom he had known while growing up in trinidad . they raised a young orphaned cousin of essie 's , a girl named olga , as their own . his third marriage , after essie died , was to a woman named doreen , who gave birth to julian 's only biological child , mark anthony bernard julian , in july 1971 . documentary . imdbtitle:4343770 is a documentary by independent filmmaker billy tooma . it covers julian 's life from his birth in trinidad to his adventures in harlem , ethiopia , and everywhere between . it saw its world premiere on 24 june 2017 , at the aviation hall of fame & museum of new jersey . . references . further reading . othen , christopher . lost lions of judah : haile selassie 's mongrel foreign legion ( amberley publishing , 2017 ) shaftel , david . '' the black eagle of harlem : the truth behind the tall tales of hubert fauntleroy julian '' , air & space magazine , 1 january 2009 snider , jill . '' great shadow in the sky : the airplane in the tulsa race riot of 1921 and the development of african american visions of aviation , 1921–1926 , '' in the airplane in american culture , ed dominick pisano ( ann arbor : university of michigan press 2003 ) , 105–146 white , shane , stephen garton , stephen robertson and graham white . '' the black eagle of harlem '' . in beyond blackface : african americans and the creation of american popular culture , 1890–1930 , ed . fitzhugh brundage ( chapel hill : university of north carolina press , 2011 )