Burr (novel)

description . burr ( 1973 ) portrays the eponymous anti-hero as a fascinating and honorable gentleman , and portrays his contemporary opponents as mortal men ; thus , george washington is an incompetent military officer , a general who lost most of his battles ; thomas jefferson is a fey , especially dark and pedantic hypocrite who schemed and bribed witnesses in support of a false charge of treason against burr , to whom he almost lost the presidency in the 1800 united states presidential election ; and alexander hamilton is a bastard-born , over-ambitious opportunist whose rise in high politics was by general washington 's hand , until being fatally wounded in the burr-hamilton duel ( july 11 , 1804 ) . the enmities were established , when , despite burr 's initial victory in the voting , the presidential election of 1800 was a tied vote in the electoral college , between him and thomas jefferson . to break the tied electoral vote , the house of representatives—dominated by alexander hamilton—voted thirty-six times , until they elected jefferson as the u.s . president , and , by procedural default , named burr as the u.s . vice president . the columbia encyclopedia , fifth edition ( 1993 ) p . 401 . the contemporary story of political intrigue occurs from 1833 to 1840 , in the time of jacksonian democracy , years after the treason trial . the narrator is charles schermerhorn schuyler , an ambitious young man working as a law clerk in aaron burr 's law firm , in new york city . charlie schuyler is not from a politically-connected family , and is ambivalent about politics and about how law is practiced . hesitant about taking the examination for admission to the bar , schuyler works as a newspaper reporter , all the while dreaming of becoming a successful writer , so that he can emigrate from the u.s . to europe . important to the intrigues of the plotters are the allegation that vice president martin van buren is the bastard son of aaron burr ; the veracity or falsity of that allegation ; and its usefulness in high-government politics . because van buren is a strong candidate for the 1836 united states presidential election , his political enemies , especially a newspaper publisher , enlist schuyler to glean personally embarrassing facts about van buren from the aged burr , a septuagenarian man in 1834 . tempted with the promise of a fortune in money , schuyler thinks about writing a pamphlet proving that vice president van buren is an illegitimate son of burr , and so end van buren 's political career . schuyler is torn between honoring burr , whom he admires , and betraying him to gain much money , and so take the woman he loves to a new future in europe . at story 's end , charlie schuyler has learned more than he had expected about aaron burr , about martin van buren , and about his own character , as a man in the world , as charles schuyler . burr ( magill ’ s survey of american literature , revised edition ) as in the novels messiah ( 1954 ) , julian ( 1964 ) , and creation ( 1981 ) , the colonial people , their times , and the places of burr ( 1973 ) are presented through the memoirs of a character in the tale . throughout the story , the narrative presents thematic parallels to the memoirs of aaron burr ( 1837 ) , co-written with matthew livingston davis . aaron burr , matthew livingston davis , memoirs of aaron burr , volume 1 , 1837 . many of the incidents of story and plot in burr are historical : thomas jefferson was a slaver who fathered children with some of his slave women ; the continental army general james wilkinson was a double agent for the spanish empire ; alexander hamilton regularly was challenged to a duel , by most every political opponent who felt slandered by him ; and aaron burr was tried for and acquitted of treason against the u.s . , consequent to the burr plot ( 1807 ) for an empire in the south-western territories of the country . the columbia encyclopedia , fifth edition ( 1993 ) p . 401 . in the '' afterword '' to burr , the novelist vidal said that , in most instances , the actions and words of the historical characters represented are based upon their personal documents and historical records . vidal , gore . burr ( 1973 ) , p . 429–30 moreover , besides challenging the traditionalist , mythical iconography of the founding fathers of the united states , the most controversial aspect of the novel burr is that alexander hamilton gossiped that burr and his daughter , theodosia , practiced incest—which character assassination led to their mortal duel ; killing hamilton ended the public life of aaron burr . burr ( magill ’ s survey of american literature , revised edition ) . narrative frame . the novel comprises two storylines . one gives us charles schuyler 's personal and professional perspectives on early mid-19th-century new york , and his coming to know the titular character in his later , quieter years . the other gives us , by means of burr 's recollections as read and recorded by schuyler , his experience of late eighteenth century british colonial life and the independence struggle or '' revolution '' ( in the section called 1833 ) ; and most substantially , his experience of life in post-independence new york and his participation in the political development of the american republic ( through the main section of the novel , 1834 ) , thus : ; 1834 chapter ten : memoirs of aaron burr — one chapter eleven : memoirs of aaron burr — two chapter twelve : memoirs of aaron burr — three , and memoirs of aaron burr — four chapter thirteen : memoirs of aaron burr — five chapter fourteen : memoirs of aaron burr — six chapter fifteen : memoirs of aaron burr — seven chapter eighteen : memoirs of aaron burr — eight , and memoirs of aaron burr — nine chapter nineteen : memoirs of aaron burr — ten chapter twenty : memoirs of aaron burr — eleven chapter twenty-one : memoirs of aaron burr — twelve chapter twenty-five : memoirs of aaron burr — thirteen chapter twenty-seven : memoirs of aaron burr — fourteen chapter twenty-eight : memoirs of aaron burr — fifteen chapter thirty-two : memoirs of aaron burr — sixteen chapter thirty-four : memoirs of aaron burr — seventeen chapter thirty-six : memoirs of aaron burr — eighteen ; 1835 chapter two : memoirs of aaron burr — nineteen chapter five : memoirs of aaron burr — twenty chapter seven : memoirs of aaron burr — twenty-one . list of characters . the characters in burr include numerous historical as well as purely fictional figures . the sections of the novel that deal with the narrator 's activity in the 1830s ( as opposed to burr 's reminiscences of his adventures in the american revolution through his trial for treason ) focus on the political life of new york city during the end of the administration of president andrew jackson . this list of characters includes those that appear or are mentioned in the novel by the narrator , charlie schuyler ; they are listed in order of appearance or mention . charles schuyler - law clerk in aaron burr 's law office , narrator aaron burr - new york city attorney , former vice president eliza jumel - burr 's second wife ; reputed to be the richest woman in new york city dr . bogart - elderly friend of burr nelson chase - burr 's law clerk , married to mary eliza chase mary eliza chase - niece of ( rumored to be daughter of ) eliza jumel william legget - subeditor of evening post william cullen bryant - assistant editor of evening post , poet martin van buren - vice president of the united states under president andrew jackson henry clay - senator , candidate for president ( mentioned ) richard johnson - senator from kentucky , potential reform candidate for president ( mentioned ) mr . craft - burr 's law office clerk matthew l . davis - editor , tammany hall insider , burr 's official biographer sam swartwout - collector of the port of new york , appointed by president jackson rosanna townsend - madam helen jewett - prostitute aaron columbus burr - burr 's illegitimate son , silversmith edwin forrest - actor william de la touche clancy - publisher of the american edmund simpson - owner of the park theater ( mentioned ) tom hamblin - manager of the bowery theater ( mentioned ) ephraim no last name - ferryman , son of burr 's revolutionary war comrade james madison - former president of the united states , friend of burr ( mentioned ) john marshall - former chief justice of the united states , presiding judge in burr 's treason trial , cousin of thomas jefferson ( mentioned ) washington irving - novelist and journalist , acquaintance of burr gulian verplanck - anti-tammany mayoral candidate for new york city fitz-greene halleck - poet , secretary to john jacob astor john jacob astor - financier mordecai noah - former sheriff of new york city thomas skidmore - proto-socialist reformer charles baldwin - glutton alexander hamilton , jr . - lawyer , son of burr 's rival ( mentioned ) edward livingston - congressman reverend peter williams - pastor of african episcopal church on centre street , nyc arthur and lewis tappan - abolitionist leaders mrs . redman - boardinghouse proprietress reginald gower - printer and bookstore owner mrs . keese ( formerly mrs . overton ) - burr 's landlady robert wright - philadelphia publisher of davy crockett colonel davy crockett - congressman from tennessee george orson fuller - phrenologist richard robinson - male prostitute , accused murderer john ogden edwards - judge , burr 's cousin pantaleone - butler at american consulate in amalfi donna carolina de traxler - wife of charles schuyler