Frank McKenna

early life . mckenna was born in apohaqui , new brunswick , canada . he was raised in the home of his grandparents , who lived adjacent to his parents because his large family could not be wholly housed in his parents ' home . after completing high school in sussex , new brunswick , he completed a bachelor 's degree in political science and economics at st . francis xavier university in antigonish , nova scotia . he began master 's degree at queen 's university in kingston , ontario , but after working for a stint with allan maceachen , he took maceachen 's advice that most politicians are lawyers and enrolled in law school at the university of new brunswick in fredericton . after he obtained a law degree , he moved to chatham , new brunswick , and began the practice of law . he became famous and something of a folk hero , particularly among acadians , as the defence lawyer in the high-profile murder case of famous new brunswick boxing champion , yvon durelle , in what was a widely publicized case . . new brunswick politics . a few years later , he entered provincial politics and won a seat in the legislative assembly of new brunswick in the 1982 election to represent chatham , new brunswick . he became leader of the provincial liberals in 1985 , and won one of the largest electoral victories in canadian history in the 1987 election when his party won every seat in the legislature . mckenna 's term in office was viewed mostly as a success . his key priority throughout his term was job creation and he was known to say that the '' best welfare state we have is a job . '' he encouraged small business growth and tried to entice large companies to invest in the province with tax incentives , often directly calling individual professionals to urge them to bring their talents to new brunswick . another of his strategies was to raise the collective self-esteem of new brunswickers , which he believed would increase productivity . he introduced a sophisticated public relations operation which included the use of controversial video news releases . mckenna 's time as premier , however , also saw some controversy . in his first move as premier , mckenna dismissed several senior public servants in an effort to gain greater control over the province 's public service , which some observers perceived as a drastic step away from the integrity of the province 's impartial and professional public service . cooper , christopher . a . ( 2018 ) . bureaucratic identity and the resistance of politicization . administration & society , 50 ( 1 ) , 30–52 . mckenna was also criticized for increasing the number of communications personnel on the government payroll but countered this complaint by pointing out that the primary government communications agency , communications new brunswick , had been depoliticized . he was also criticized for creating a toll free telephone number to the premier 's office which had the number 1-800-mckenna , the number was functional throughout north america and was used for both new brunswick constituents and business interests that were considering moving to the province . believing ten years was long enough for a premier to hold office , and having pledged to serve such a term when first elected , mckenna resigned in 1997 – 10 years to the day of the 1987 election . . business career . after leaving office , mckenna moved to cap-pélé , new brunswick , near moncton , and returned to the practice of law and sat on numerous corporate boards . he also purchased with his son , james mckenna , glenwood kitchen ltd . a manufacturer of high-end custom cabinetry in shediac , new brunswick . his membership on the canadian advisory board of the carlyle group drew adverse media attention ; the media ceased pursuing the issue when mckenna explained that the board was established to advise on a canadian investment fund that the group never created and that the board had never become active . following the announcement of his appointment as canadian ambassador to washington , he resigned his position as counsel at law firms including mcinnes cooper and osler , hoskin & harcourt , as well as all positions on corporate boards including his role as interim chairman of the board of canwest global communications , a post he assumed upon the death of its founder and chairman israel asper . . ambassador . mckenna was mentioned as a possible ambassador to the us to succeed michael kergin after paul martin took power . speculation increased after john manley turned down prime minister martin 's offer . many in the press commented on mckenna 's business connections being an asset , notably as a member of the carlyle group and his friendship with former president george h . w . bush . on january 5 , 2005 , prime minister paul martin 's office confirmed that mckenna would be the 21st ambassador to the united states . on january 14 , the posting was formally announced and would be effective on march 1 . mckenna became the ambassador on march 8 when u.s . president george w . bush accepted his credentials . on february 22 , 2005 , mckenna told reporters canada was already a part of the u.s . national missile defense ( nmd ) ( or ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) ) program through an amendment to the norad agreement made on august 5 , 2004 , which granted u.s . access to norad 's missile warning systems explicitly for use in nmd . however , martin contradicted this two days later when he announced that canada would not formally participate in the nmd program but focus on other items of shared defence/security interest . while canadian defence minister bill graham said mckenna was simply misunderstood ( as the norad agreement and missile defence are separate ) , this initial contradiction was interpreted by others as evidence of characteristic indecision by the martin government and was seen to somewhat hamper mckenna 's credibility . as ambassador , mckenna attracted more media attention than most of his recent predecessors on both sides of the border . in the u.s . , his message was one of dispelling common urban legends and misconceptions about canada , while in canada he urged canadians to be more understanding of the american people and culture , particularly following what he argued is their understandable sensitivity after the september 11 , 2001 attacks . mckenna generated controversy after giving a luncheon speech on september 29 , 2005 , to a toronto business club . mckenna blasted the u.s . bureaucracy and congressional system of government saying '' the government of the united states is in large measure dysfunctional . '' he contrasted it with canada 's government , and praised canada 's strong parliamentary party discipline as being much more '' efficient '' though sometimes less preferable . on january 25 , 2006 , mckenna offered his resignation as ambassador , writing to prime minister-designate stephen harper that he wished to be relieved of his duties , but offering to stay on until his successor is chosen . he was succeeded as ambassador by michael wilson on march 13 , 2006 . prospective career in federal politics . since leaving politics in 1997 , mckenna served for a brief time on the security intelligence review committee . he has been touted several times as a potential atlantic canada minister in the cabinets of jean chrétien and paul martin . he expressed some interest in running in the 2004 federal election but announced he would not do so because of the lack of an available riding in the moncton , area . he did not want to push aside any incumbent liberal member of parliament . after resigning the premiership of new brunswick , mckenna was identified as a potential future leader of the liberal party of canada , and prime minister of canada . a poll released on august 23 , 2005 , commissioned by the toronto star , showed that mckenna was the top choice of the public to succeed prime minister paul martin . among the general public , mckenna beat former new democratic party ontario premier bob rae by a margin of 23 to 11 while among self-identified liberals , mckenna beat former deputy prime minister of canada john manley by a margin of 28 to 13 . the october 2005 issue of saturday night magazine had pollster darrell bricker and liberal strategist warren kinsella create odds for potential liberal leadership candidates . they made mckenna the favourite with 7 to 2 odds beating scott brison ( 8 to 1 ) , martin cauchon ( 10 to 1 ) , michael ignatieff and john manley ( each 15 to 1 ) among others . on january 30 , 2006 , mckenna confirmed earlier reports that he was not running for the liberal leadership to replace paul martin , who announced his resignation as party leader on the january 23 , 2006 election night . mckenna acknowledged the strength of the liberal brand stating : '' you 've got pretty good odds of being the prime minister if you 're the leader of the liberal party '' & ndash ; every leader of the liberal party since sir wilfrid laurier in 1896 had become prime minister . however , he put an end to his involvement in the 2006 liberal party leadership race , explaining his decision by saying that he did not want '' his life to become consumed by politics . '' and that : '' i reminded myself of my vow upon leaving office that , having escaped the trap , i wouldn ’ t go back for the cheese . '' following stéphane dion 's resignation as federal liberal leader after the 2008 election , mckenna was once again touted as a possibility to take the helm of the federal liberal party . however , on october 28 , 2008 , mckenna said that he would not be seeking the leadership , saying '' although i have been deeply moved by expressions of support for me from across the country , i have not been persuaded to change my long-standing resolve to exit public life for good , '' and '' my only regret is that i can not honour the expectations of friends and supporters who have shown enormous loyalty to me . '' . banking . frank mckenna was appointed as deputy chair , toronto-dominion bank effective may 1 , 2006 . mckenna is responsible for helping to build long-term business relationships that support td 's growth strategy in canada and the united states . mckenna is responsible for supporting the company in its customer acquisition strategy , particularly in the areas of wholesale and commercial banking . in addition , he is responsible for representing td as it works to expand its north american presence as one of the continent 's ten largest banks , as measured by market capitalization . frank mckenna is referred to in the book '' clinton cash '' by peter schweizer . the majority of the reference is regarding the keystone pipeline decision-making process . hillary clinton serving as secretary of state in the united states , and the monetary involvement with td bank in canada is described in depth . the book describes td bank , with frank mckenna as vice chairman , as having '' paid bill more than any other financial institution for lectures . more than goldman sachs , ubs , jpmorgan , or anyone on wall street '' . quoting from the book , '' td bank paid bill 1.8 million for ten speeches over a roughly two-and-half-year period from late 2008 to mid-2011 . '' '' at several of the speeches , ( bill ) clinton was introduced or interviewed by td bank vice chairman frank mckenna . frank mckenna is described as a '' good friend of both bill and hillary clinton '' . '' clinton cash '' by peter schweizer pg.108 . distinctions . queen 's privy council for canada ( 1999 ) . references . further reading . philip lee , frank : the life and politics of frank mckenna , goose lane , 2001 . external links . mckenna 's letter of resignation frank mckenna biography — td bank frank mckenna biography — legislative assembly of new - brunswick liberal party of new-brunswick