Transmembrane protein

types . classification by structure . there are two basic types of transmembrane proteins : alpha-helix and beta-barrels . alpha-helical proteins are present in the inner membranes of bacterial cells or the plasma membrane of eukaryotes , and sometimes in the outer membranes . alpha-helical proteins in outer membranes include stannin and certain lipoproteins , and others this is the major category of transmembrane proteins . in humans , 27 % of all proteins have been estimated to be alpha-helical membrane proteins . beta-barrel proteins are so far found only in outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria , cell walls of gram-positive bacteria , outer membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts , or can be secreted as pore-forming toxins . all beta-barrel transmembrane proteins have simplest up-and-down topology , which may reflect their common evolutionary origin and similar folding mechanism . in addition to the protein domains , there are unusual transmembrane elements formed by peptides . typical example is gramicidin a , a peptide that forms a dimeric transmembrane β-helix . this peptide is secreted by gram-positive bacteria as an antibiotic . a transmembrane polyproline helix has not been reported in natural proteins . nonetheless , this structure was experimentally observed in specifically designed artificial peptides . . classification by topology . this classification refers to the protein topology of the lipid bilayer . types i , ii , iii and iv are bitopic protein . type i transmembrane proteins are anchored to the lipid membrane with a stop-transfer anchor sequence and have their n-terminal domains targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum ( er ) lumen during synthesis ( and the extracellular space , if mature forms are located on cell membranes ) . type ii and iii are anchored with a signal-anchor sequence , with type ii being targeted to the er lumen with its c-terminal domain , while type iii have their n-terminal domains targeted to the er lumen . type iv is subdivided into iv-a , with their n-terminal domains targeted to the cytosol and iv-b , with an n-terminal domain targeted to the lumen . harvey lodish etc . ; molecular cell biology , sixth edition , p.546 the implications for the division in the four types are especially manifest at the time of translocation and er-bound translation , when the protein has to be passed through the er membrane in a direction dependent on the type . 3d structure . membrane protein structures can be determined by x-ray crystallography , electron microscopy or nmr spectroscopy . the most common tertiary structures of these proteins are transmembrane helix bundle and beta barrel . the portion of the membrane proteins that are attached to the lipid bilayer ( see annular lipid shell ) consist mostly of hydrophobic amino acids . white , stephen . '' general principle of membrane protein folding and stability '' . stephen white laboratory homepage . 10 nov . 2009 . web . membrane proteins which have hydrophobic surfaces , are relatively flexible and are expressed at relatively low levels . this creates difficulties in obtaining enough protein and then growing crystals . hence , despite the significant functional importance of membrane proteins , determining atomic resolution structures for these proteins is more difficult than globular proteins . as of january 2013 less than 0.1 % of protein structures determined were membrane proteins despite being 20–30 % of the total proteome . membrane proteins of known 3d structure due to this difficulty and the importance of this class of proteins methods of protein structure prediction based on hydropathy plots , the positive inside rule and other methods have been developed . . thermodynamic stability and folding . stability of α-helical transmembrane proteins . transmembrane helix proteins are unusually stable judging from thermal denaturation studies , because they do not unfold completely within the membranes ( the complete unfolding would require breaking down too many α-helical h-bonds in the nonpolar media ) . on the other hand , these proteins easily misfold , due to non-native aggregation in membranes , transition to the molten globule states , formation of non-native disulfide bonds , or unfolding of peripheral regions and nonregular loops that are locally less stable . it is also important to properly define the unfolded state . the unfolded state of membrane proteins in detergent micelles is different from that in the thermal denaturation experiments . this state represents a combination of folded hydrophobic α-helices and partially unfolded segments covered by the detergent . for example , the '' unfolded '' bacteriorhodopsin in sds micelles has four transmembrane α-helices folded , while the rest of the protein is situated at the micelle-water interface and can adopt different types of non-native amphiphilic structures . free energy differences between such detergent-denatured and native states are similar to stabilities of water-soluble proteins ( . 3d structures . light absorption-driven transporters . bacteriorhodopsin-like proteins including rhodopsin ( see also opsin ) bacterial photosynthetic reaction centres and photosystems i and ii light-harvesting complexes from bacteria and chloroplasts . oxidoreduction-driven transporters . transmembrane cytochrome b-like proteins : coenzyme q - cytochrome c reductase ( cytochrome bc1 ) ; cytochrome b6f complex ; formate dehydrogenase , respiratory nitrate reductase ; succinate - coenzyme q reductase ( fumarate reductase ) ; and succinate dehydrogenase . see electron transport chain . cytochrome c oxidases from bacteria and mitochondria . electrochemical potential-driven transporters . proton or sodium translocating f-type and v-type atpases . p-p-bond hydrolysis-driven transporters . p-type calcium atpase ( five different conformations ) calcium atpase regulators phospholamban and sarcolipin abc transporters general secretory pathway ( sec ) translocon ( preprotein translocase secy ) . porters ( uniporters , symporters , antiporters ) . mitochondrial carrier proteins major facilitator superfamily ( glycerol-3-phosphate transporter , lactose permease , and multidrug transporter emrd ) resistance-nodulation-cell division ( multidrug efflux transporter acrb , see multidrug resistance ) dicarboxylate/amino acid : cation symporter ( proton glutamate symporter ) monovalent cation/proton antiporter ( sodium/proton antiporter 1 nhaa ) neurotransmitter sodium symporter ammonia transporters drug/metabolite transporter ( small multidrug resistance transporter emre - the structures are retracted as erroneous ) . alpha-helical channels including ion channels . voltage-gated ion channel like , including potassium channels kcsa and kvap , and inward-rectifier potassium ion channel kirbac large-conductance mechanosensitive channel , mscl mechanosensitive ion channel magnesium transporters ligand-gated ion channel of neurotransmitter receptors ( acetylcholine receptor ) aquaporins chloride channels outer membrane auxiliary proteins ( polysaccharide transporter ) - α-helical transmembrane proteins from the outer bacterial membrane . enzymes . methane monooxygenase rhomboid protease disulfide bond formation protein ( dsba-dsbb complex ) . proteins with alpha-helical transmembrane anchors . t cell receptor transmembrane dimerization domain ] cytochrome c nitrite reductase complex steryl-sulfate sulfohydrolase stannin glycophorin a dimer inovirus ( filamentous phage ) major coat protein pilin pulmonary surfactant-associated protein monoamine oxidases a and b fatty acid amide hydrolase cytochrome p450 oxidases mineralocorticoid . signal peptide peptidase membrane protease specific for a stomatin homolog . β-barrels composed of a single polypeptide chain . beta barrels from eight beta-strands and with '' shear number '' of ten ( n 8 , s 10 ) . they include : ompa-like transmembrane domain ( ompa ) virulence-related outer membrane protein family ( ompx ) outer membrane protein w family ( ompw ) antimicrobial peptide resistance and lipid a acylation protein family ( pagp ) lipid a deacylase pagl opacity family porins ( nspa ) autotransporter domain ( n 12 , s 14 ) fadl outer membrane protein transport family , including fatty acid transporter fadl ( n 14 , s 14 ) general bacterial porin family , known as trimeric porins ( n 16 , s 20 ) maltoporin , or sugar porins ( n 18 , s 22 ) nucleoside-specific porin ( n 12 , s 16 ) outer membrane phospholipase a1 ( n 12 , s 16 ) tonb-dependent receptors and their plug domain . they are ligand-gated outer membrane channels ( n 22 , s 24 ) , including cobalamin transporter btub , fe ( iii ) -pyochelin receptor fpta , receptor fepa , ferric hydroxamate uptake receptor fhua , transporter feca , and pyoverdine receptor fpva outer membrane protein opca family ( n 10 , s 12 ) that includes outer membrane protease ompt and outer membrane protein opca outer membrane protein g porin family ( n 14 , s 16 ) note : n and s are , respectively , the number of beta-strands and the '' shear number '' of the beta-barrel . β-barrels composed of several polypeptide chains . trimeric autotransporter ( n 12 , s 12 ) outer membrane efflux proteins , also known as trimeric outer membrane factors ( n 12 , s 18 ) including tolc and multidrug resistance proteins mspa porin ( octamer , n s 16 ) and α-hemolysin ( heptamer n s 14 ) . these proteins are secreted . see also . membrane protein membrane topology transmembrane domain transmembrane receptors . references .