Gottfried August Bürger

biography . he was born in molmerswende ( now a part of mansfeld ) , principality of halberstadt , where his father was the lutheran pastor . he showed an early predilection for solitary and gloomy places and the making of verses , for which he had no other model than hymnals . at the age of twelve , bürger was practically adopted by his maternal grandfather , bauer , at aschersleben , who sent him to the pädagogium at halle . he learned latin with difficulty . in 1764 he passed to the university of halle , as a student of theology , which , however , he soon abandoned for the study of jurisprudence . there he fell under the influence of christian adolph klotz ( 1738–1771 ) , who directed bürger 's attention to literature and encouraged his natural disposition to a wild and unregulated life . in consequence of his dissipated habits , he was in 1767 recalled by his grandfather , but on promising to reform was in 1768 allowed to enter the university of göttingen as a law student . as he continued his wild career , however , his grandfather withdrew his support and he was left to his own devices . meanwhile , he had made fair progress with his legal studies , and had the good fortune to form a close friendship with a number of young men of literary tastes . he studied the ancient classics and the best works in french , italian , spanish and english , particularly shakespeare , and the old english and scottish ballads . thomas percy 's reliques of ancient english poetry was his constant companion . in the göttinger musenalmanach , edited by heinrich christian boie and friedrich wilhelm gotter , bürger 's first poems were published , and by 1771 he had already become widely known as a poet . in 1772 , through boie 's influence , bürger obtained the post of amtmann or district magistrate at altengleichen near göttingen . his grandfather was now reconciled to him , paid his debts and established him in his new sphere of activity . thumb thumb meanwhile , he kept in touch with his göttingen friends , and when the göttinger bund or '' hain '' ( '' göttinger hainbund '' ) was formed , bürger , though not himself a member , kept in close touch with it . in 1773 , the ballad lenore lenore , by göttfried august bürger , ( translated by dante gabriel rossetti ) was published in the musenalmanach . this poem , which in dramatic force and in its vivid realization of the weird and supernatural remains without a rival , made his name a household word in göttingen . lenore was paraphrased by walter scott under the title william and helen and goethe did the same under the title bride of corinth . german classics , by william cleaver wilkinson published 1900 by funk & wagnalls company in new york , london , p . 151ff william and helen by sir walter scott the vampire female : '' the bride of corinth '' ( 1797 ) by : johann wolfgang von goethe in 1774 he married dorette leonhart , the daughter of a hanoverian official ; but his passion for his wife 's younger sister auguste ( the '' molly '' of his poems and elegies ) rendered the union unhappy and unsettled his life . in 1778 bürger became editor of the musenalmanach , a position he retained until his death . in the same year published the first collection of his poems . in 1780 he took a farm at appenrode , but in three years lost so much money that he had to abandon the venture . pecuniary troubles oppressed him , and being accused of neglecting his official duties , and feeling his honour attacked , he gave up his official position and removed in 1784 to göttingen , where he established himself as privatdozent . image : wilhelm volkhart lenardo und blandine.jpg thumb right lenardo und blandine , after bürger 's poem , by wilhelm volkhart shortly before his removal there his wife died ( july 30 , 1784 ) , and on june 29 in the next year he married his sister-in-law '' molly . '' her death in childbirth on january 9 , 1786 affected him deeply . he appeared to lose at once all courage and all bodily and mental vigour . he still continued to teach in göttingen ; at the jubilee of the foundation of the university in 1787 he was made an honorary doctor of philosophy , and in 1789 was appointed extraordinary professor in that faculty , though without a stipend . he was obliged to gain his living by poorly rewarded translations for booksellers . in 1790 , he married a third time , his wife being a certain elise hahn , who , enchanted with his poems , had offered him her heart and hand . only a few weeks of married life with his '' schwabenmädchen '' sufficed to prove his mistake , and after two and a half years he divorced her . deeply wounded by schiller 's criticism , in the 14th and 15th part of the allgemeine literaturzeitung of 1791 , of the second edition of his poems , disappointed , wrecked in fortune and health , bürger eked out a precarious existence as a teacher in göttingen until , ill with tuberculosis , he died there on june 8 , 1794 . the government of hanover afforded him some assistance shortly before his death . bürger 's talent for popular poetry was very considerable , and his ballads are among the finest in the german language . besides lenore , das lied vom braven manne , die kuh , der kaiser und der abt and der wilde jäger are famous . among his purely lyrical poems , but few have earned a lasting reputation ; but mention may be made of das blümchen wunderhold , lied an den lieben mond , and a few love songs . his sonnets , particularly the elegies , are of great beauty . bürger revived the sonnet form in german , and his experiments in it were praised as models by schiller , despite his severe criticism of some of bürger 's more popular poems . . editions . editions of bürger 's sämtliche schriften appeared at göttingen , 1817 ( incomplete ) ; 1829—1833 ( 8 vols . ) , and 1835 ( one vol . ) ; also a selection by eduard grisebach ( 5th ed , 1894 ) . the gedichte have been published in innumerable editions , the best being that by august sauer ( 2 vols . , 1884 ) . briefe von und an bürger were edited by adolf strodtmann in 4 vols . ( 1874 ) . bürger was introduced to english readers in william and helen ( 1775 ) , walter scott 's version of lenore . the elder dumas translated lenore into french . bürger is known for german translations of baron munchausen ’ s narrative of his marvellous travels and campaigns in russia by rudolf erich raspe ( 1786 , after the release of the 4th english edition ; 2nd expanded ed . 1788 , after the release of the 5th expanded english edition ) . in his introduction to the 1788 german edition , bürger admitted to adapting and elaborating the original english-language works , and , despite his clear notice that he was doing a translation , for some time bürger was believed to be the author of the tales . raspe had originally concealed his authorship . see also . baron munchausen rudolf erich raspe le chasseur maudit ( franck ) . notes . references . this work in turn cites : biography by heinrich pröhle ( 1856 ) introduction from sauer 's edition of the poems wolfgang von wurzbach , gottfried august bürger . sein leben und seine werke ( leipzig , 1900 ) . external links . [ lenore . ballade von g . a . bürger . melodram mit begleitung des pianoforte . op . 8 . & 93 ; from the sibley music library digital score collection [ lenore . ballade von bürger . musik von & 93 ; franz liszt . texte francais d'alexandre picotfrom the sibley music library digital score collection william cleaver wilkinson german classics published 1900 by funk & wagnalls company in new york , london p . 151