Division by zero

elementary arithmetic . when division is explained at the elementary arithmetic level , it is often considered as splitting a set of objects into equal parts . as an example , consider having ten cookies , and these cookies are to be distributed equally to five people at a table . each person would receive 2 cookies . similarly , if there are ten cookies , and only one person at the table , that person would receive 10 cookies . so , for dividing by zero , what is the number of cookies that each person receives when 10 cookies are evenly distributed amongst 0 people at a table ? certain words can be pinpointed in the question to highlight the problem . the problem with this question is the '' when '' . there is no way to distribute 10 cookies to nobody . so , at least in elementary arithmetic , is said to be either meaningless , or undefined . if there are , say , 5 cookies and 2 people , the problem is in '' evenly distribute '' . in any integer partition of 5 things into 2 parts , either one of the parts of the partition will have more elements than the other , or there will be a remainder ( written as 2 r1 ) . or , the problem with 5 cookies and 2 people can be solved by cutting one cookie in half , which introduces the idea of fractions 2 . the problem with 5 cookies and 0 people , on the other hand , can not be solved in any way that preserves the meaning of '' divides '' . in elementary algebra , another way of looking at division by zero is that division can always be checked using multiplication . considering the example above , setting x , if x equals ten divided by zero , then x times zero equals ten , but there is no x that , when multiplied by zero , gives ten ( or any number other than zero ) . if instead of x , x , then every x satisfies the question 'what number x , multiplied by zero , gives zero ? ' . early attempts . the brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta of brahmagupta ( c . 598–668 ) is the earliest text to treat zero as a number in its own right and to define operations involving zero . the author could not explain division by zero in his texts : his definition can be easily proven to lead to algebraic absurdities . according to brahmagupta , a positive or negative number when divided by zero is a fraction with the zero as denominator . zero divided by a negative or positive number is either zero or is expressed as a fraction with zero as numerator and the finite quantity as denominator . zero divided by zero is zero . in 830 , mahāvīra unsuccessfully tried to correct brahmagupta 's mistake in his book in ganita sara samgraha : '' a number remains unchanged when divided by zero . '' . algebra . the four basic operations – addition , subtraction , multiplication and division – as applied to whole numbers ( positive integers ) , with some restrictions , in elementary arithmetic are used as a framework to support the extension of the realm of numbers to which they apply . for instance , to make it possible to subtract any whole number from another , the realm of numbers must be expanded to the entire set of integers in order to incorporate the negative integers . similarly , to support division of any integer by any other , the realm of numbers must expand to the rational numbers . during this gradual expansion of the number system , care is taken to ensure that the '' extended operations '' , when applied to the older numbers , do not produce different results . loosely speaking , since division by zero has no meaning ( is undefined ) in the whole number setting , this remains true as the setting expands to the real or even complex numbers . as the realm of numbers to which these operations can be applied expands there are also changes in how the operations are viewed . for instance , in the realm of integers , subtraction is no longer considered a basic operation since it can be replaced by addition of signed numbers . similarly , when the realm of numbers expands to include the rational numbers , division is replaced by multiplication by certain rational numbers . in keeping with this change of viewpoint , the question , '' why ca n't we divide by zero ? '' , becomes '' why ca n't a rational number have a zero denominator ? '' . answering this revised question precisely requires close examination of the definition of rational numbers . in the modern approach to constructing the field of real numbers , the rational numbers appear as an intermediate step in the development that is founded on set theory . first , the natural numbers ( including zero ) are established on an axiomatic basis such as peano axioms and then this is expanded to the ring of integers . the next step is to define the rational numbers keeping in mind that this must be done using only the sets and operations that have already been established , namely , addition , multiplication and the integers . starting with the set of ordered pairs of integers , . historical accidents . on september 21 , 1997 , a division by zero error in the '' remote data base manager '' aboard uss yorktown ( cg-48 ) brought down all the machines on the network , causing the ship 's propulsion system to fail . . see also . asymptote well-defined division by zero , a short story by ted chiang indeterminate form zero divisor . references . notes . . sources . patrick suppes 1957 ( 1999 dover edition ) , introduction to logic , dover publications , inc . , mineola , new york . ( pbk . ) . this book is in print and readily available . suppes 's §8.5 the problem of division by zero begins this way : '' that everything is not for the best in this best of all possible worlds , even in mathematics , is well illustrated by the vexing problem of defining the operation of division in the elementary theory of arithmetic '' ( p . & nbsp ; 163 ) . in his §8.7 five approaches to division by zero he remarks that '' . there is no uniformly satisfactory solution '' ( p . & nbsp ; 166 ) charles seife 2000 , zero : the biography of a dangerous idea , penguin books , ny , ( pbk . ) . this award-winning book is very accessible . along with the fascinating history of ( for some ) an abhorrent notion and others a cultural asset , describes how zero is misapplied with respect to multiplication and division . alfred tarski 1941 ( 1995 dover edition ) , introduction to logic and to the methodology of deductive sciences , dover publications , inc . , mineola , new york . ( pbk . ) . tarski 's §53 definitions whose definiendum contains the identity sign discusses how mistakes are made ( at least with respect to zero ) . he ends his chapter '' ( a discussion of this rather difficult problem exactly one number satisfying a definiens will be omitted here . ) '' ( p . & nbsp ; 183 ) . the points to exercise 24 ( p . & nbsp ; 189 ) wherein he asks for a proof of the following : '' in section 53 , the definition of the number ' 0 ' was stated by way of an example . to be certain this definition does not lead to a contradiction , it should be preceded by the following theorem : there exists exactly one number x such that , for any number y , one has : y + x y '' . further reading . jakub czajko ( july 2004 ) '' '' , chaos , solitons and fractals , volume 21 , number 2 , pages 261–271 . to continue with continuity metaphysica 6 , pp . & nbsp ; 91–109 , a philosophy paper from 2005 , reintroduced the ( ancient indian ) idea of an applicable whole number equal to 1/0 , in a more modern ( cantorian ) style .