Scott catalogue

background . the first scott catalogue was a 21-page pamphlet with the title descriptive catalogue of american and foreign postage stamps , issued from 1840 to date , splendidly illustrated with colored engravings and containing the current value of each variety . it was published in september 1868 by john walter scott , an early stamp dealer in new york , and purported to list all the stamps of the world , with prices for each . a notice inside does caution the reader that '' it is simply impossible for any one to always have every stamp '' in stock . the original catalog has been reprinted . thumb in subsequent years , the scott company gave up dealing in stamps but continued to publish the catalog , gradually providing more detail as the hobby evolved and collectors became more sophisticated . in addition to the factual information about the stamps , the catalog includes price information based on market analysis and reported sales from the previous year . as of 2006 , and despite annual changes to save space , the catalog was more than 5,000 pages . the scott numbering system assigns plain numbers for regular mail stamps , and uses capital letter prefixes for special-purpose types , such as '' b '' for semi-postals and '' c '' for airmail . the numbers are generally consecutive ; there are gaps among older stamps , where some numbered types were later renumbered , and among newer stamps where scott has left numbers unassigned in the anticipation of additional stamps in a series . if more stamps than expected appear , scott will add a capital letter as suffix , or if the change is very recent , it will renumber stamps . minor variations , such as shades or errors , get a lowercase letter ; so the '' c3a '' above indicates a variation ( error in this case ) on what is listed as inverted_jenny . because of its commercial importance the publishers of the scott catalogue claim copyright on their numbering systems , and grant only limited licenses for their use by others . the inconsistency with which scott enforced these licenses resulted in a lawsuit by scott against krause publications ( publishers of the minkus catalogue ) for copyright infringement . after krause filed a defense , the suit was settled out of court , and krause continued to reference the scott numbers . editors of this , the dominant catalog in the united states , have great influence over what is and is not considered to be a valid postage stamp . for instance , in the 1960s the countries of the united arab emirates issued many stamps that were likely never actually on sale in a post office , so scott does not list most of them . one must go to a michel catalog , for instance , to see them described . the lack of a scott listing , though , means that most american dealers will refuse to trade in such stamps . similarly , scott lists most stamps from countries embargoed by the u.s . government , and in some cases lists them without catalog values . to some extent , this is unavoidable , since the ban on importation means that scott 's editors are unable even to acquire copies of the stamps to be described . moreover , since american dealers and collectors are unable to buy the stamps legally , they are unlikely to have any need of the data . ( again , interested persons typically use michel or other catalogs instead . ) the policy changes with government policy ; stamps of cuba , libya and north vietnam now appear in the scott catalogues after an absence of some years . the dominance of scott is such that u.s . collectors know many of the numbers by heart , and dealers need only mention the number in their price lists . for instance , united states no . '' c3a '' is instantly recognized as the inverted jenny , a rare airmail inverted error stamp . contents . the contents for each of the twelve volumes ( 2021 catalogs ) are listed below . scott has chosen to identify the current twelve volume format of catalogs as only six volumes with an alphabetical suffix ( vol 1b is actually vol 2 , etc ) . volume 1a : united states , united nations , ' a ' countries to australia volume 1b : austria to ' b ' countries volume 2a : ' c ' countries to curacao volume 2b : cyprus to '' f '' countries volume 3a : ' g ' countries volume 3b : ' h ' through ' i ' countries volume 4a : ' j ' through ' l ' countries volume 4b : 'm ' countries volume 5a : ' n ' countries through ' p ' countries ( philippines ) volume 5b : ' p ' countries ( pitcairn islands ) to 's ' countries ( samoa ) volume 6a : 's ' countries ( san marino ) to 't ' countries ( tete ) volume 6b : 't ' countries ( thailand ) to ' z ' countries . covers . for many years , the stamps featured on the cover of the catalogue follow a specific theme as follows : image : scott catalog 2002 cover.jpg thumb covers of the 2002 edition featured art on stamps 1993 : trains and birds 1994 : ships and butterflies 1995 : space and mushrooms 1996 : world war ii 1997 : olympics 1998 : no specific topic 1999 : used stamps 2000 : millennium 2001 : space exploration 2002 : paintings 2003 : airplanes ( for the 100th anniversary of the first airplane flight ) 2004 : famous buildings 2005 : earth 's features 2006 : mail transport 2007 : scouting 2008 : odd-shaped stamps 2009 : abraham lincoln 2010 : birds 2011 : unesco world heritage sites 2012 : bridges 2013 : lighthouses 2014 : women 2015 : stamps from '' dead countries '' 2016 : new york city 2017 : royalty 2018 : stamp collecting ( scott 's 150th anniversary ) 2019 : trains . illustrations . in may , 2001 scott announced a project to include a scan of each stamp in its catalogues . many were made from its own reference collection and introduced in the six volume 2002 edition as black and white images . color images were introduced in 2003 in the classic specialized catalogue and in 2005 in the specialized catalogue of united states . in 2006 color images were included in the main scott catalogues . shortly after the program was announced , scott publishing received a letter from hsien-ming meng , a physician in dayton , ohio , and worldwide collector of mint stamps with a nearly complete collection . dr . meng offered to permit scanning of his collection , an offer that was eagerly accepted by scott publishing . scans from dr . meng 's collection began appearing in volume 4 of the 2002 catalog . together with generous access by many other collectors , meng 's cooperation has resulted in creation of scanned images of all but about 900 stamps by scott as of 2021 catalogue series . about 200 are specialized stamps from the us specialized catalogue . about 700 are used stamp images that scott is replacing with mint images in the general world catalogues . only a handful of black and white images are left in the world catalogues . meng , born in 1926 , died february 8 , 2011 . . scott specialized catalogue of united states stamps and covers . scott publishing co also produces a related volume which more comprehensively lists all united states postage stamps and postal history . it is generally known as the scott specialized and is regarded by many as the definitive single volume reference to usa postage stamps . the catalogue provides more detail than volume one , with particular emphasis on varieties and errors . a new edition of the catalogue is produced annually with a particular edition year date generally indicating production in the middle of the previous year . biannual valuing supplements are also issued in the spring and fall . scott classic specialized catalogue : stamps and covers of the world . scott classic specialized catalogue : stamps and covers of the world is limited to stamps and covers that were produced between 1840 and 1940 or for the british commonwealth nations to 1952 . it covers all postage stamp producing nations in one volume for those years .