Skaro

geography . the bbc-licensed the dalek book ( 1964 ) includes a map entitled '' the dalography of skaro '' on which three continents are shown ; dalazar , darren and davius . dalazar is described as the most habitable part of skaro , having a subtropical climate and being the location of the dalek city . to the south-east is the lake of mutations and to the south the drammankins mountain range , which stretches across the entire continent from the east to west coast . to the north-east dalazar is joined to the continent of darren by a land bridge . darren is indicated to be the site of the neutron bomb explosion which transformed the daleks from their humanoid form into mutants . the north and south regions are separated by the '' radiation range '' mountains . the third continent , davius , is shown divided into east and west regions by the '' river of whirling waters '' , with the eastern region being identified as the home of the thals . five seas are shown ; the ocean of ooze , sea of acid , sea of rust , serpent sea and the land-locked bottomless sea . other major features are the island of moving mountains and an island chain named the forbidden islands , both situated in the ocean of ooze , and the island of gushing gold located in the sea of rust . the bbc-licensed the dalek outer space book ( 1966 ) confirms some of these details in a cutaway illustration entitled '' the strata of skaro '' . a sea called the ocean of death is added , together with the islands of mist which , from the description , is an alternative name for the dalek book 's forbidden islands . further information is added by the 1977 dalek annual article '' the dark side of skaro '' , which mentions the crystal continent , serpent island and a feature called the rocks , consisting of stone needles projecting thousands of feet high out of the sea and populated by gigantic flying creatures . other areas listed are a prison colony , a region populated by the mutated descendants of prisoners used in early dalek neutron weapon tests and the swamp lands , described as possibly being a vast , living organism that engulfs and feeds upon anything coming near its surface . other skarosian geographical features are mentioned in the tv21 comic strip the daleks ( 1965-1967 ) . in the story '' duel of the daleks '' an acid river and mercury geysers appear . in '' legacy of yesteryear '' a desert area called tarran , volcanic plains and a northern polar region are portrayed , the latter area stated to have been created when the explosion of the daleks ' neutron bomb shifted the planet on its axis . the novelisation of remembrance of the daleks ( 1990 ) states that the dalek city is called mensvat esc-dalek and is located in the vekis nar-kangji ( plain of swords ) . in the computer game doctor who adventure game '' city of the daleks '' ( 2010 ) the dalek city is named kaalann . . flora . in most media , skaro is portrayed as a nuclear wasteland and almost entirely devoid of plant life , with only a petrified forest located close to the dalek city . several exceptions are mentioned , however . varga plants , resembling large , motile cacti studded with poisonous thorns , are seen in mission to the unknown ( 1965 ) . native to skaro , they have been deliberately mutated by the daleks to act as sentries and deter other life forms from interfering with their activities . an individual poisoned by the thorns develops an urge to kill and eventually transforms into another varga plant . the arkellis flower is described as being rare and only able to root in metal , with its sap being a constituent of the golden emperor dalek 's metallic casing . in the tv21 comic strip the daleks , dense undergrowth is depicted on several occasions , most notably in the mercury geyser swamps and the mutated forest . fauna . the doctor who television programme has shown only a few examples of skaro 's native wildlife . in the daleks , a small , dead reptilian creature with long teeth , a pointed snout and pliable metal skin is discovered , the first doctor surmising that its body is held together by a magnetic field . this is later identified by a thal as a '' magnedon '' . ( in the 1965 film dr . who and the daleks , which is based upon the daleks television serial , this creature is portrayed as a rather larger , petrified , dragon-like animal ) . a multi-tentacled creature with two luminous eyes is also shown inhabiting the lake of mutations . a large , aggressive , tentacled animal called a '' slyther '' appears in the dalek invasion of earth ( 1964 ) . it is described as the black dalek ’ s '' pet '' and is used to patrol the dalek mine workings . giant land-based clams , capable of crushing bone , are seen in genesis of the daleks ( 1975 ) . they are described as being the discarded results of davros ’ genetic experiments . in '' asylum of the daleks '' ( 2012 ) a flock of bird-like creatures are seen briefly , flying in the distance above the ruins of the dalek city . other media have introduced additional creatures . the dalek book 's dalography of skaro states that vast serpents , mutated from earthworms by a neutron bomb explosion , live below the surface of the continent of darren . the book also contains the dalek dictionary , which includes entries for '' lallapalange '' ( an extinct harmony bird which sang with two voices ) and '' urvacryl '' ( a two-headed eel inhabiting the lake of mutations ) . later , the tv21 '' the daleks '' comic strip added giant eels , , terrorkons ( large aquatic creatures resembling wingless , two-headed dragons ) and amorphous sand creatures . the dalek outer space book contains illustrations of several subterranean creatures including '' sponge people '' , a '' sucker '' ( resembling a red beetle ) , the tentacled krakis and an unnamed squirrel-like animal . to this can be added yellow and black beetles and '' rock leopards '' , mentioned in the novelisation of remembrance of the daleks . . sapient inhabitants . in the television serial the daleks two sapient , humanoid species are described as having existed on skaro ; the dals , teachers and philosophers , and the thals , a race of warriors . radiation from a neutronic war caused both species to mutate . by the time of the story , the thals are a blond-haired caucasian people , their physical mutation having come full circle . they have renounced violence and survive by farming . in contrast , the dals have evolved into hideous , aggressive , xenophobic creatures which have encased themselves in protective metal shells and rely upon technology for survival . they now refer to themselves as daleks . this evolution of the dalek and thal races is contradicted in the tv serial genesis of the daleks . the story depicts the dalek progenitors as being a humanoid race called the kaleds . they have been at war with the thals for generations , turning skaro into a wasteland devastated by chemical and nuclear weapons . while the daleks and thals have each engineered their own huge , protective dome in which to shelter , the disfigured victims of chemical and radioactive contamination are banished to roam the surface as '' mutos '' . the kaled scientists realise that the planet 's toxic environment will eventually cause the mutation of their species , bringing their genetic purity to an end . their chief scientist , davros , decides to accelerate the mutation to find the ultimate kaled form , in the process '' improving '' it by removing all traces of conscience , feeling and emotion . the resulting organisms are placed into armoured travel machines and referred to by davros as daleks . the tv century 21 dalek comic strip presents a different description of skaro 's sapient life . one race , the daleks , are depicted as short , blue-skinned , aggressive humanoids . they are engaged in a vicious war against the thals who , although not shown in the strip , are described as tall , handsome , peaceful and living in constant fear of dalek attack . the daleks build a neutron bomb to finally bring the conflict to an end but a meteorite storm detonates the device prematurely , apparently destroying most of the life on skaro . a mutated dalek commandeers a prototype war machine , created shortly before the holocaust , to act as a mobile protective casing . it then convinces the last two humanoid daleks , yarvelling and zolfian , to build more casings for the many other mutants which have survived . no further mention of the thals is made in the strip , the implication being that they all perished in the nuclear conflagration . the big finish productions i , davros series of audio plays ( 2006 ) places the divergence of the kaled and thal species at a point 10 million years prior to the events depicted in genesis of the daleks and refers to two other species , the tharons and the dals , as both being extinct due to kaled genocide by the time of the kaled-thal war . . fictional history . the central plot device of the doctor who television programme , and of the whoniverse , is time travel . coupled with successive programme producers ' and scriptwriters ' uneven approach to continuity , attempts at imposing a strict chronology upon skaro 's fictional history are problematic . the events leading to the creation of the daleks , as depicted in genesis of the daleks ( 1975 ) , apparently pre-date those of the daleks ( 1963–64 ) while in the evil of the daleks ( 1967 ) , the story of which concludes with the apparent destruction of the daleks due to a civil war on skaro , the second doctor states that this is the creatures ' '' final end '' . in destiny of the daleks ( 1979 ) , set many centuries after the events of genesis of the daleks , the daleks return to an abandoned and still radioactive skaro to retrieve their creator , davros . in the subsequent serial revelation of the daleks ( 1985 ) , the daleks are shown to have re-occupied skaro ; those loyal to the dalek supreme travelling from there to capture davros and destroy his new dalek army on the planet necros . skaro 's final appearance in the classic series is in the story remembrance of the daleks ( 1988 ) , in which the seventh doctor tricks davros and his imperial daleks into using a time lord device called the hand of omega on skaro 's sun to recreate the gallifreyan time travel experiments . the doctor sabotages the device , however , causing their sun to turn into a supernova which completely obliterates the planet . an image of skaro is shown briefly at the start of the doctor who ( film ) , the narrative indicating that it is the site of a trial of the master . no reference to the prior destruction of the planet is made . an attempt to explain this incongruity is made in the novel war of the daleks ( 1997 ) in which , at the climax of the events portrayed in remembrance of the daleks , the daleks manipulate davros and the seventh doctor into destroying a planet called antalin which they have terraformed to resemble skaro and take its place . the novel further places the story destiny of the daleks on the disguised antalin , and not skaro . in the revived doctor who series , skaro is referenced by the introduction of the cult of skaro in '' doomsday '' ( 2006 ) and '' daleks in manhattan '' ( 2007 ) , where the character dalek caan states that the planet is '' gone . destroyed in a great war '' . later , in the episode '' asylum of the daleks '' ( 2012 ) , the eleventh doctor is lured to skaro briefly . the planet is depicted as having been abandoned once again and is shown with a stormy , rain-swept red sky , the landscape filled with derelict structures and skyscrapers . this is consistent with the appearance of post-time war skaro as seen in the downloadable computer game city of the daleks and an article written by russell t davies in the doctor who annual 2006 , which states that skaro was devastated at the end of the time war . skaro appears in '' the magician 's apprentice '' and '' the witch 's familiar '' ( 2015 ) , where davros is shown first as an adolescent lost on a desert battlefield , and then having returned to the planet many years later to die with his '' children '' , the daleks . the planet has been made invisible and , when questioned by the doctor , davros states that the daleks have rebuilt it . the dalek outer space book ( 1967 ) contains a chart entitled '' the evolution of skaro '' which traces the development of the planet from its creation , through various geological periods , to the advent of the daleks . . other appearances . skaro is the setting for the feature film dr . who and the daleks ( 1965 ) , starring peter cushing . although it is not named in the film , it is retroactively identified in its sequel , daleks ' invasion earth 2150 a.d . ( 1966 ) . skaro appears in the big finish doctor who audio stories the mutant phase ( 2000 ) and davros ( 2003 ) , and features prominently in the i , davros spin-off series ( 2006 ) , which focuses on davros ' life and the events that led to his creating the daleks . skaro makes an appearance in the doctor who : the adventure games episode '' city of the daleks '' . in the narrative the daleks remove skaro from the time war , preventing its destruction . the eleventh doctor thwarts the dalek 's plan , negating the planet 's survival and restoring the proper timeline . in april 2010 piers wenger , executive producer of doctor who at the time , stated that the games constitute '' episodes '' and form part of the doctor who universe . skaro appears in daleks ! , a five part cgi animated series launched by the bbc on its youtube channel in november 2020 as part of its multi-platform story , time lord victorious ! . . exterior filming locations . for genesis of the daleks exterior scenes supposedly taking place on skaro were shot at betchworth quarry , surrey and for destiny of the daleks at winspit quarry , dorset . in '' the magician 's apprentice '' and '' the witch 's familiar '' , exterior scenes set on skaro were filmed in tenerife . . see also . dalek dalek variants history of the daleks . references . bibliography . . external links . skaro home of the daleks , article at the doctor who site