Phase space

introduction . in a phase space , every degree of freedom or parameter of the system is represented as an axis of a multidimensional space ; a one-dimensional system is called a phase line , while a two-dimensional system is called a phase plane . for every possible state of the system or allowed combination of values of the system 's parameters , a point is included in the multidimensional space . the system 's evolving state over time traces a path ( a phase space trajectory for the system ) through the high-dimensional space . the phase space trajectory represents the set of states compatible with starting from one particular initial condition , located in the full phase space that represents the set of states compatible with starting from any initial condition . as a whole , the phase diagram represents all that the system can be , and its shape can easily elucidate qualities of the system that might not be obvious otherwise . a phase space may contain a great number of dimensions . for instance , a gas containing many molecules may require a separate dimension for each particle 's x , y and z positions and momenta ( 6 dimensions for an idealized monatomic gas ) , and for more complex molecular systems additional dimensions are required to describe vibrational modes of the molecular bonds , as well as spin around 3 axes . phase spaces are easier to use when analyzing the behavior of mechanical systems restricted to motion around and along various axes of rotation or translation - e.g . in robotics , like analyzing the range of motion of a robotic arm or determining the optimal path to achieve a particular position/momentum result . conjugate momenta . in classical mechanics , any choice of generalized coordinates q i for the position ( i.e . coordinates on configuration space ) defines conjugate momentum p i which together define co-ordinates on phase space . more abstractly , in classical mechanics phase space is the cotangent bundle of configuration space , and in this interpretation the procedure above expresses that a choice of local coordinates on configuration space induces a choice of natural local darboux coordinates for the standard symplectic structure on a cotangent space . statistical ensembles in phase space . the motion of an ensemble of systems in this space is studied by classical statistical mechanics . the local density of points in such systems obeys liouville 's theorem , and so can be taken as constant . within the context of a model system in classical mechanics , the phase space coordinates of the system at any given time are composed of all of the system 's dynamic variables . because of this , it is possible to calculate the state of the system at any given time in the future or the past , through integration of hamilton 's or lagrange 's equations of motion . examples . low dimensions . for simple systems , there may be as few as one or two degrees of freedom . one degree of freedom occurs when one has an autonomous ordinary differential equation in a single variable , dy/dt f ( y ) , with the resulting one-dimensional system being called a phase line , and the qualitative behaviour of the system being immediately visible from the phase line . the simplest non-trivial examples are the exponential growth model/decay ( one unstable/stable equilibrium ) and the logistic growth model ( two equilibria , one stable , one unstable ) . the phase space of a two-dimensional system is called a phase plane , which occurs in classical mechanics for a single particle moving in one dimension , and where the two variables are position and velocity . in this case , a sketch of the phase portrait may give qualitative information about the dynamics of the system , such as the limit cycle of the van der pol oscillator shown in the diagram . here , the horizontal axis gives the position and vertical axis the velocity . as the system evolves , its state follows one of the lines ( trajectories ) on the phase diagram . image : limitcycle.svg thumb 340px right phase portrait of the van der pol oscillator . chaos theory . classic examples of phase diagrams from chaos theory are : the lorenz attractor population growth ( i.e . logistic map ) parameter plane of complex quadratic polynomials with mandelbrot set . phase plot . a plot of position and momentum variables as a function of time is sometimes called a phase plot or a phase diagram . however the latter expression , '' phase diagram '' , is more usually reserved in the physical sciences for a diagram showing the various regions of stability of the thermodynamic phases of a chemical system , which consists of pressure , temperature , and composition . quantum mechanics . in quantum mechanics , the coordinates p and q of phase space normally become hermitian operators in a hilbert space . but they may alternatively retain their classical interpretation , provided functions of them compose in novel algebraic ways ( through moyal product ) . this is consistent with the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics . every quantum mechanical observable corresponds to a unique function or distribution on phase space , and vice versa , as specified by hermann weyl ( 1927 ) and supplemented by john von neumann ( 1931 ) ; eugene wigner ( 1932 ) ; and , in a grand synthesis , by h j groenewold ( 1946 ) . with j e moyal ( 1949 ) , these completed the foundations of the phase space formulation of quantum mechanics , a complete and logically autonomous reformulation of quantum mechanics . ( its modern abstractions include deformation quantization and geometric quantization . ) expectation values in phase-space quantization are obtained isomorphically to tracing operator observables with the density matrix in hilbert space : they are obtained by phase-space integrals of observables , with the wigner quasi-probability distribution effectively serving as a measure . thus , by expressing quantum mechanics in phase space ( the same ambit as for classical mechanics ) , the weyl map facilitates recognition of quantum mechanics as a deformation ( generalization ) of classical mechanics , with deformation parameter ħ/s , where s is the action of the relevant process . ( other familiar deformations in physics involve the deformation of classical newtonian into special relativity , with deformation parameter v/c ; or the deformation of newtonian gravity into general relativity , with deformation parameter schwarzschild radius/characteristic-dimension . ) classical expressions , observables , and operations ( such as poisson brackets ) are modified by ħ-dependent quantum corrections , as the conventional commutative multiplication applying in classical mechanics is generalized to the noncommutative star-multiplication characterizing quantum mechanics and underlying its uncertainty principle . thermodynamics and statistical mechanics . in thermodynamics and statistical mechanics contexts , the term phase space has two meanings : for one , it is used in the same sense as in classical mechanics . if a thermodynamic system consists of n particles , then a point in the 6n-dimensional phase space describes the dynamic state of every particle in that system , as each particle is associated with three-position variables and three momentum variables . in this sense , as long as the particles are gibbs paradox , a point in phase space is said to be a microstate of the system . ( for identical particles a microstate will consist of a set of n ! points , corresponding to all possible exchanges of the n particles . ) n is typically on the order of avogadro 's number , thus describing the system at a microscopic level is often impractical . this leads to the use of phase space in a different sense . the phase space can also refer to the space that is parameterized by the macroscopic states of the system , such as pressure , temperature , etc . for instance , one may view the pressure-volume diagram or entropy-temperature diagrams as describing part of this phase space . a point in this phase space is correspondingly called a macrostate . there may easily be more than one microstate with the same macrostate . for example , for a fixed temperature , the system could have many dynamic configurations at the microscopic level . when used in this sense , a phase is a region of phase space where the system in question is in , for example , the liquid phase , or solid phase , etc . since there are many more microstates than macrostates , the phase space in the first sense is usually a manifold of much larger dimensions than in the second sense . clearly , many more parameters are required to register every detail of the system down to the molecular or atomic scale than to simply specify , say , the temperature or the pressure of the system . optics . phase space is extensively used in nonimaging optics , the branch of optics devoted to illumination . it is also an important concept in hamiltonian optics . phase integral . in classical statistical mechanics ( continuous energies ) the concept of phase space provides a classical analog to the partition function ( sum over states ) known as the phase integral . instead of summing the boltzmann factor over discretely spaced energy states ( defined by appropriate integer quantum numbers for each degree of freedom ) one may integrate over continuous phase space . such integration essentially consists of two parts : integration of the momentum component of all degrees of freedom ( momentum space ) and integration of the position component of all degrees of freedom ( configuration space ) . once the phase integral is known , it may be related to the classical partition function by multiplication of a normalization constant representing the number of quantum energy states per unit phase space . this normalization constant is simply the inverse of planck 's constant raised to a power equal to the number of degrees of freedom for the system . . see also . phase line , 1-dimensional case phase plane , 2-dimensional case phase portrait phase space method parameter space separatrix ; applications optical phase space state space ( controls ) for information about state space ( similar to phase state ) in control engineering . state space for information about state space with discrete states in computer science . molecular dynamics ; mathematics cotangent bundle dynamic system symplectic manifold wigner–weyl transform ; physics classical mechanics hamiltonian mechanics lagrangian mechanics state space ( physics ) for information about state space in physics phase-space formulation of quantum mechanics