Chain (disambiguation)

accessories and apparel . chain mail , a type of armor made of interlocking chain links necklace or neck chain , a type of jewelry which is worn around the neck . places . chain bridge ( budapest ) , a suspension bridge that spans river danube between buda and pest chain bridge ( potomac river ) , a bridge across the potomac river at the little falls in washington , d.c . chains ( geological site ) , a geological site on the north-west plateau of exmoor , somerset , england union bridge ( tweed ) ( or '' chain bridge '' ) , a bridge in northumberland . people with the name . ernst chain ( 1906–1979 ) , nobel prize-winning chemist famed for his isolation of penicillin john t . chain , jr . , ( born 1934 ) retired u.s . air force general . arts , entertainment , and media . films and television . chain ( film ) , a 2004 film written and directed by jem cohen chains , a short film starring tna wrestler kurt angle chains ( blackadder ) , a 1986 episode of the british sitcom blackadder ii chains of love ( tv series ) , an american dating game show adapted from a dutch television series . literature . chains , a 2008 , historical fiction book by laurie halse anderson chains ( play ) , a 1909 play by elizabeth baker . music . chain ( band ) , an australian blues rock band active from the 1960s to the present . albums . chain ( bonnie pink ep ) , 2008 chain ( kat-tun album ) , 2012 chain ( paul haig album ) , 1989 chain ( pylon album ) , 1990 . songs . chains ( dlt song ) , 1996 chains ( nick jonas song ) , 2014 chains ( patty loveless song ) , 1990 chains ( cookies song ) , 1962 , covered by the beatles chains ( tina arena song ) , 1994 chains ( usher song ) , 2015 '' chains '' , a song by chicago from the 1982 album chicago 16 . business and economics . chain ( real estate ) , a group of buyers/sellers that are linked together chain of command , the line of authority and responsibility along which orders are passed chain store , a retail shop outlets which share a brand and central management chained dollars , used to express real dollar amounts adjusted over time for inflation cinema chain , or movie chain cold chain , a temperature-controlled supply chain fast food chain hotel chain restaurant chain supply chain , a coordinated system of organizations , people , activities , information and resources involved in moving a product or service from supplier to customer value chain , a management concept first described by michael porter . mathematics . chain ( poset ) , a set paired with a total order , it usually refers to a totally ordered subset of some partially ordered set chain ( algebraic topology ) , a formal linear combination of k-simplices chain complex , a generalization of the algebraic topology construct to homological algebra chain rule , a tool for differentiation in calculus chain sequence , numbers in the mathematical study of continued fractions conway chained arrow notation , a way of expressing exponents using arrows jordan chain , a sequence of linearly independent generalized eigenvectors of descending rank markov chain , a discrete-time stochastic process with the markov property pseudo-arc , which has at its heart the concept of a chain . mechanics , engineering , and implements . bar-link chain ( block chain ) , a mechanical drive chain bicycle chain , a roller chain that transfers power from the pedals to the drive-wheel of a bicycle buffers and chain coupler , a railway device catenary ( or '' chain '' ) , the shape of a hanging flexible cable when supported at its ends and acted upon by a uniform gravitational force chain home and chain home low , an early british rdf ( radar ) systems of the wwii era chain tool , a small mechanical device used to '' break '' a bicycle chain in such a way that it could be mended with the same tool conveyor chain , a chain that conveys items in chain conveyor systems drive chain , a way of transmitting mechanical power from one place to another roller chain , a most commonly used for transmission of mechanical power self-lubricating chain , to eliminate the need for further lubrication snow chains or tire chains , devices fitted to the tires of vehicles to provide maximum traction timing chain , part of an internal combustion engine . science . chemistry . chain reaction , a sequence of reactions where a reactive product or by-product causes additional reactions ideal chain , a mathematical model of polymer folding polymer chain , structure of a polymer worm-like chain ( or semiflexible chain ) , a model in polymer physics used to describe the behavior of semi-flexible polymers . other uses in science . electron transport chain , a sequence of chemical reactions yielding the transport of an electron through a membrane food chain , a hierarchical or recursive list of predators and prey . sequences . geological features . archipelago , a chain of islands crater chain , a line of craters on the surface of an astronomical body mountain range , a chain of hills or mountains . other sequences . chain bridge chain , planetary , a chain of globes serving as fields of evolution in theosophical cosmology chain crew ( football chains ) , 10 yards in length , for setting the spot to reach for a first down chain gang chain letter , a message that attempts to induce the recipient to make a number of copies of the message and then pass them on to one or more new recipients chain of events chain of thought , a continuous thought process where ideas follow one from the other chain smoking , the habit of smoking continuously chain stitch , in sewing and embroidery , a series of looped stitches that form a chain chaining , a technique from applied behavioral analysis for teaching complicated tasks by breaking them into simpler steps daisy chain ( disambiguation ) , various meanings hudson river chain , one of several chains used in blockades of the hudson river human chain ( politics ) , a form of protest signifying chain , in semiotics , an interlocking system of signifiers . units of measurement . chain ( unit ) , a unit of length gunter 's chain , a unit of measurement . other uses . chain ( caste ) , a cultivating and fishing caste found in eastern uttar pradesh , india chains ( nautical ) , small platforms on the sides of ships fetter ( buddhism ) ( mental chain ) , a deeply rooted mental attachment preventing one from achieving liberation from suffering . see also . chain ( disambiguation ) chain of ponds ( disambiguation ) chained ( disambiguation ) serial ( disambiguation ) the chain ( disambiguation ) chane ( disambiguation )