Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler

early life . kahnweiler 's family moved from rockenhausen , a small village in the palatinate , to mannheim , baden , where kahnweiler was born in 1884 . his upbringing and education at a german gymnasium prepared him well for his life as an art connoisseur and pragmatic businessman . early employment in the family business of stockbroker in germany and paris gave way to an interest in art collecting while kahnweiler was still in his twenties . he opened his first small art gallery ( 4 by 4 meters ) in paris in 1907 at 28 rue vignon . there was a family precedent for such an enterprise , since his uncle , who ran a famous stock brokerage house in london , was a major art collector of traditional english art works and furniture . . art dealer . kahnweiler is considered to have been one of the greatest supporters of the cubism art movement through his activities as an art dealer and spokesman for artists . he was among the first people to recognize the importance and beauty of picasso 's les demoiselles d'avignon and immediately wanted to buy it along with all of picasso 's works . picasso wrote of kahnweiler , '' what would have become of us if kahnweiler had n't had a business sense ? '' kahnweiler 's appreciation of picasso 's talents was especially gratifying to the artist , since he was largely unknown and destitute at the time when many of his most famous works were created . in his gallery , kahnweiler supported many of the great artists of his time who found themselves without adequate recognition and little or no interest among collectors . initial purchases included works by kees van dongen , andré derain andré masson fernand léger , georges braque , juan gris , maurice de vlaminck and several other artists of the same generation . to use his own word , kahnweiler wanted to '' defend '' great artists , but only those who had no dealers and of whose talents he was convinced . rather than exhibiting appealing works by established artists from the past and present , kahnweiler championed burgeoning artists who had come from all over the globe to live and work in montparnasse and montmartre at the time . thus paul cézanne , although a great artist , was considered too old to be represented , and his work was already represented by the dealer ambroise vollard in any case . along with such men as alfred flechtheim , paul cassirer , daniel wildenstein , léonce rosenberg and paul rosenberg , kahnweiler was one of the influential art connoisseurs of the 20th century . as a businessman , kahnweiler pioneered many new methods of working with artists and art dealing ; these are now established practices in the industry . in 1907 , when there were only half a dozen viable galleries in paris , he made contracts with artists to buy all of their work in order to free them from financial worries and permit them to concentrate on their creative work . he met with them daily to discuss their work , photographed each work they produced ( he felt it imperative to have a record ) , held exhibitions of their work and promoted their work internationally . since he considered himself friends with many of them , he co-owned little sailing boats with his artists . as part of his activities in promoting the work of emerging artists , kahnweiler sponsored the first exhibition of the work of georges braque . he encouraged the practice of publishing beaux livres ( beautiful books ) , in which a contemporary artist would illustrate a work of a contemporary writer . he expanded his presentations by bringing together artists , writers and poets to produce their works as a joint project in more than 40 books . picasso , for example , illustrated the works of max jacob . as a publisher of art with literary works , he had no equal , and was the first to sponsor publications by max jacob , guillaume apollinaire , andré masson , gertrude stein , pablo picasso , and many others . in doing so , he launched many literary careers . kahnweiler 's entrepreneurial abilities were so acute that by the 1950s his art gallery was among the top 100 french companies in terms of export figures . art history . although the financial support for artists was an important contribution to art history , he was also a significant figure for his work as an art historian and eyewitness to the emergence of cubism during the period 1907–1914 . when working in paris , his spare time was devoted to reading and understanding the history of art and aesthetics . he also spent his time visiting the city 's museums and art galleries . besides the museums in paris , he took trips around the european continent to see what was being shown in museums and art galleries outside france . he gave his first interview on cubism in 1912 , and it was actual historical events that led to his career as a historian . there is a view that kahnweiler 's sensibility was such that his gallery , and the way he styled and developed it , was as much a cubist gallery as were the paintings by picasso and the other cubist painters . the gallery had a clear aesthetic position , uncompromising integrity , financial stability and creative development . during the years 1907-1914 his gallery was a central cradle for cubism , not only to display the works , but where one also met the artists . concurrently , the primary means for avant-garde painters and sculptors to show their works to a wider audience remained the salon des indépendants and the salon d'automne . kahnweiler forbade his 'gallery cubists ' from exhibiting at these major salons , michael taylor , 2010 , philadelphia museum of art , modern and contemporary 439 , metzinger - tea time ( woman with a teaspoon ) , 1 audio stop 439 , podcast and by so doing , actually removed them from public view . from the viewpoint of the general public , cubism came to be more associated with the 'salon cubists ' , such as jean metzinger , albert gleizes , fernand léger , robert delaunay , henri le fauconnier , marcel duchamp and francis picabia . steve edwards , paul wood , art of the avant-gardes , yale university press , 2004 , . world war i and world war ii . the outbreak of world war i in 1914 not only ruptured the cubist experiments in art , but also forced kahnweiler to live in exile in switzerland ; due to his german citizenship , he was considered an alien under french law . many german nationals living in france had their possessions sequestered by the french state , and as a result , kahnweiler 's collection was confiscated in 1914 and sold by the government in a series of auctions at the hôtel drouot between 1921 and 1923 . malcolm gee , dealers , critics and collectors of modern painting ; aspects of the parisian art market between 1910 and 1930 , courtauld phd dissertation 1977 , p . 25 kahnweiler collection : catalogue des tableaux , aquarelles , gouaches et dessins . part ii , hôtel drouot , paris , november 17-18 , 1921 during the years of exile ( until 1920 ) , kahnweiler studied and wrote works such as the der weg zum kubismus and confessions esthétiques . writing becoming a passion he continued over his lifetime , and he authored hundreds of books and major articles . the second period of enforced writing came during a period of internal exile caused by the events of world war ii . as a jew , the nazis forced him to flee paris . he remained in france , in hiding . '' under the clouds from the gas chambers , '' as he put it in his seminal work on juan gris . at the end . kahnweiler was very prolific as an author , but never produced a full autobiography . there was , however , a series of interviews first aired on french television , then published and translated as a book under the title mes galleries et mes peintres ( '' my galleries and my painters '' ) . for his 80th birthday , a festschrift was published with contributions by the world 's leading philosophers , art historians , and artists , all of whom emphasized the vital importance of his unique contribution to art history – an importance still not yet fully appreciated , probably due to the fact that he has been viewed mostly as an art dealer and not as an art historian . this situation has been aggravated because some of his major works on aesthetics were either never translated into english or badly translated . the omission of key elements of a proper understanding of cubism and focus on small and sensational elements of his complex relationship with picasso has led to a flawed understanding of the ideas he put forward in these writings . although revered by artists for his business and aesthetic sense and respected by art dealers and art historians , the true impact of his life and work has yet to be recognized , despite a recent biography by pierre assouline . he died in 1979 in paris , aged 94 . sources . john richardson , a life of picasso : the prodigy , 1881–1906 , publ . alfred a . knopf , 1991 , john richardson , a life of picasso : the cubist rebel , 1907-1916 , publ . alfred a . knopf , 1991 , malcolm gee , dealers , critics , and collectors of modern painting : aspects of the parisian art market between 1910 and 1930 , london , garland , 1981 . references . external links . d . h . kahnweiler on photographs by vaclav chochola new york times review of bio pic , retrieved online april 26 , 2008