History of Tyrol

prehistory . archaeological findings show people settled in the middle alpine region , later to be called tyrol , when the glaciers retreated and flora and fauna revived , after the last ice age ended around 12,000 bc . artifacts found on the seiser alm date to the upper paleolithic era . in the valley bottoms near bolzano , brixen and salorno , mesolithic hunters resting places were discovered . stone artefacts recovered there were dated to the 8th millennia bc . discovery of ötzi on the similaun glacier in 1991 proved man had already crossed the highest alpine passes 5000 years ago . sedentary settlements of farmers and herders can be traced back to 5000 bc . there is ample evidence of settlements in the main and side valleys during the early and middle bronze age ( 1800-1300 bc ) . preferred settlement sites were sunny terraces on the valleys slopes , and hill tops in the middle heights . in the bronze and iron ages the region was home to a series of autochthonous cultures occupying roughly the area of the later county of tyrol . the most prominent are the late bronze age laugen-melaun culture and iron age fritzens-sanzeno culture cultures . the laugen-melaun culture , named after two important archaeological sites near the modern-day town of brixen in south tyrol , originated in the 14th century bc , in the area of today 's south tyrol and trentino . it soon spread over the central area of the southern alps , encompassing south and east tyrol , trentino north of rovereto and the lower engadine ; the northern part of tyrol came under the influence of the urnfield culture . gleirscher 1992 . distinguishing factors include its characteristic richly decorated pottery , while the metal-working is strongly influenced by adjacent cultures . as in the urnfield culture , laugen-melaun-people cremated their dead , placing their ashes in urns , and worshipping their gods in sanctuaries sometimes situated in remote areas , on mountain-tops or close to water . rich burial objects show that from the 13th to 11th century bc , the laugen-melaun culture ( laugen-melaun a ) flourished , due to the mining of copper , the source material for the alloy bronze . around 500 bc , the fritzens-sanzeno culture , also known as culture of the raeti , after the goddess raetia who according to roman authors was the main deity of the people inhabiting the region , succeeded both the laugen-melaun culture of the southern and the urnfield culture of the northern part of tyrol . gleirscher 1991 . as in the preceding culture , the richly ornamented pottery is very characteristic , while many aspects such as the metal-working , burial customs and religion are strongly influenced by its neighbours , primarily the etruscans and celts . nonetheless , the fritzens-sanzeno-people possessed important distinct cultural traits distinguishing them from adjacent groups , such as the typical mountain-sanctuaries already in use during the time of the laugen-melaun culture , certain types of fibulae , bronze armor , and their own alphabet derived from one of north etruscan alphabets ( but not from the etruscan alphabet ) . the language of the raeti was kin to etruscan , but different enough to suggest a very ancient divergence between them . oettinger , norbert . seevoelker und etrusker . // pax hethitica . studies on the hittites and their neighbors in honor of itamar singer . wiesbaden , 2010 . antiquity . in 15 bc , the region was conquered by the romans , and its northern and eastern part incorporated into the roman empire as the provinces of raetia and noricum respectively . the part south of and including the area around the modern day cities of bolzano and merano became part of italia 's regio x . as in the rest of europe , the roman era left deep impressions on the culture and language , with the rhaeto-romance languages . middle ages . after the conquest of italy by the goths , tyrol became part of the ostrogothic kingdom from the 5th to the 6th century . after the fall of the ostrogothic kingdom in 553 , the germanic tribe of the lombards invaded italy and founded the lombard kingdom of italy , which no longer included all of tyrol , only its southern part . the northern part of tyrol came under the influence of the bavarii , while the west probably was part of alamannia . thus , tyrol was divided among three spheres of influence that met in the approximate area of today 's bolzano . during the 6th century bavaria and alamannia became stem duchy of the francia . on conquering the lombard kingdom of italy in 774 , charlemagne had himself crowned king of the lombards . consequently , tyrol came to be of great importance as a bridgehead to italy , which was re-affirmed during the italian campaign of otto i . in the years 1007 and 1027 the emperors of the holy roman empire granted the counties of trento , bolzano and vinschgau to the bishopric of trent . in 1027 the county of norital was granted to the bishopric of brixen , followed in 1091 by the county of puster valley . since the bishops were nominated directly by the emperor and their office was not hereditary , putting the area under their control was intended to secure it to the emperors . birth of the county of tyrol . over the centuries , the counts residing in tirol castle , near merano , extended their territory over the region . later counts would hold much of their territory directly from the holy roman emperor . the meinhardinger family , originating in gorizia , held not only tyrol and gorizia , but for a time the duchy of carinthia . at the end of count meinhard ii 's rule ( 1259–1295 ) the '' county and reign of tyrol '' had established itself firmly in the '' land on the adige and inn '' , as the region was then called . this happened on the expense of the power of the bishops , who were nominally the feudal lords of the counts of tyrol . meinhard ii also introduced more efficient systems for the administration of his territories . margarete '' maultasch '' was the last effective ruler of tyrol from the meinhardinger dynasty . in 1330 she was married to john-henry ( who later became the margrave of moravia ) , who she repudiated with the help of the tyrolean aristocracy in order to marry duke ludwig v of bavaria , a member of the powerful wittelsbach dynasty . this weakened the position of the countess and strengthened the local nobility . the only son of margarete and louis , meinhard , died in 1363 , two years after his father , leaving the countess without an heir . margarete maultasch decided to bequeath tyrol to duke rudolph iv of the house of habsburg , probably pressed by the aristocracy , an act which caused a conflict between meinhard 's uncle stephen ii , who forged an alliance with the powerful lord of milan bernabò visconti to invade tyrol , and the house of habsburg . stephen finally renounced tyrol to the habsburgs with the peace of schärding for a huge financial compensation after the death of margarete maultasch in 1369 . the red eagle in tyrol 's coat of arms derives from the red brandenburg eagle , dating from the time when louis v and margarete maultasch governed brandenburg as well . habsburg rule . the acquisition of tyrol was strategically important to the habsburg dynasty , since it allowed it to connect their austrian territories with their territorial possessions in the area of today 's switzerland . from that time , tyrol was ruled by various lines of the habsburg family , who bore the title count . tyrol repeatedly became involved in the political and military conflicts of the habsburgs with milan , venice , switzerland and the county of görz , as well as bavaria and swabia . the battle of sempach in 1386 , in which duke leopold iii of austria was defeated by the old swiss confederacy had important repercussions on tyrol , and was the first of a series of military conflicts between the county and its neighbours . the 1405-1408 war against the swiss appenzeller , 1413 the conflict with venice and 1410 the invasion of the lower inn valley by the bavarians . in 1423 , during the rule of frederick iv '' empty pockets '' , the first meeting that could be called a tyrolean parliament met . it consisted of aristocrats , bourgeois and even peasant representatives . chizzali . tyrol : impressions of tyrol . ( innsbruck : alpina printers and publishers ) p.2 during frederick iv 's tenure internal conflicts between the powerful local aristocracy and the duke arose , which eventually led to the decline of the nobles and of their traditional system of values , and strengthened the duke 's rule over the country . this enabled sigismund '' rich in coin '' to continue his father 's rule to the end of the 15th century and lead the county into the modern era . sigismund 's opulent lifestyle and the misfortunes of war with venice bled the treasury , leading to his decision to mortgage the tyrolean silver mines . by1490 , sigismund became so unpopular that he was forced to abdicate in favor of his more prosperous cousin , maximilian , king of the germans . three years after the succession , maximilian became holy roman emperor , making his preferred residence , innsbruck , the imperial capitol . maximilian added kufstein , rattenberg and kitzbühel to tyrol , and when he inherited the puster valley and east tyrol the borders of tyrol were set , with the exception of the 1817 addition of the ziller valley chizzali . tyrol : impressions of tyrol . ( innsbruck : alpina printers and publishers ) p . 2 . napoleonic wars . following defeat by napoleon in 1805 , austria was forced to cede tyrol to the kingdom of bavaria in the peace of pressburg . tyrol , as a part of bavaria , became a member of the confederation of the rhine in 1806 . consequently , king maximilian i of bavaria introduced far reaching economic , religious and administrative reforms . when in 1808 a new constitution for the kingdom of bavaria was introduced , tyrol was integrated into south bavaria , and divided into three districts , losing its special status in the kingdom . furthermore , tyroleans were now subjected to the bavarian conscription levies , and faced the prospect of having to fight against austrian troops . this , together with the economic decline under bavarian rule , and the kingdom 's religious reforms which were opposed by the catholic population , led to a growing conflict between the tyrolean population and the bavarian authorities . davey wright hamish , andreas hofer and the insurrection in the tyrol , 1809 . in 1806 , delegates from tyrol travelled to vienna to make plans for an insurrection of the tyrolean people . among them was the later leader of the insurgents , andreas hofer . the insurrection began on april 9 , 1809 in innsbruck . on april 12 , 1809 innsbruck was freed by the tyrolean '' landsturm '' commanded by captain martin teimer in the battle later known as the battles of bergisel . one day later a military unit of 8000 men consisting of bavarian and french troops approached innsbruck from the brenner pass , but was convinced to surrender by captain teimer , who dressed up as a major of the regular austrian army and made the bavarian officers believe that the austrian army was approaching innsbruck , when in fact it was still about 40 miles away . in order to convalidate the capitulation agreement , teimer was subsequently appointed major of the austrian army . throughout tyrol , the bavarian troops were killed or driven out . the tyroleans fought mainly as skirmishing sharpshooters , taking advantage of the mountainous nature of the land . they were highly mobile and made use of artificial avalanches to combat their enemies . following the defeat of the austrian army on the bavarian front , napoleon dispatched charles lefebvre to tyrol , and by may 19 innsbruck had been seized again and the rebellion seemed quelled . after archduke karl 's austrian army was defeated by napoleon at the battle of wagram , the armistice of znaim was signed . point iv of the agreement stated that austria was to withdraw its troops from the territories of vorarlberg and tyrol , returning them to bavarian rule . but the bavarians and the french found it difficult to gain control of the territory , with tyrolean sharpshooters occupying high places along the roads , blocking roads and setting off avalanches to harm the occupying army . the tyroleans managed to hold off and inflict heavy casualties on the french and bavarian troops , and on august 13 the tyrolean peasant army rallied at the bergisel again for the decisive battle . 15000 bavarian , french and saxon troops faced almost the same number of tyrolean irregulars . surrounded on all sides by the irregulars , and having sustained heavy casualties , lefebvre was forced to withdraw . andreas hofer , who in the meantime had advanced to supreme commander of the insurgents , became regent of tyrol in the name of the emperor . following the treaty of schönbrunn tyrol was again ceded to bavaria by the austrian emperor . on october 21 bavarian , french and italian troops under the command of the duke drouet d ’ erlon poured into tyrol , forcing the tyroleans to retreat to the bergisel again . as winter approached , supplies began to dwindle , and many men left to return to their homes . on 28/29 october , news of the peace treaty that had been signed by austria reached tyrol . this had catastrophic effects on the morale of the tyroleans , and andreas hofer , betrayed by his emperor , resorted to drinking . the tyrolean morale had been broken . on november 1 drouet d'erlon had recaptured innsbruck and the bergisel , and by 11 november 1809 , tyrol was entirely occupied . hofer fled into the mountains , and on 5 january 1810 he was betrayed and denounced to the authorities . on 28 january , he , his wife and his son were taken to bolzano . napoleon learnt of the capture at the start of february and ordered hofer to be tried and executed . this order was acted upon soon and hofer died at the dungeon of the fortress of mantua on february 20 , 1810 . the execution of hofer , considered a tyrolean hero until today , is the topic of the song zu mantua in banden , since 1948 the tyrol 's official anthem . crownland of tyrol . tyrol remained divided under bavarian and italian authority for another four years , before its reunification and return to austria following the decisions at the congress of vienna in 1814 . integrated into the austrian empire , from 1867 onwards , it was a kronland ( crown land ) of cisleithania , the western half of austria-hungary . world war i . thumb on the eve of world war i , the southern part of the austrian crown land of tyrol was populated mainly by italian speakers ( the so-called welschtirol , or trentino ) . its border coincided with the present-day border between south tyrol and trentino , crossing the adige valley at salorno ( chiusa di salorno/salurner klause ) . alcock 1996 , p . 67 . the existence of areas largely populated by italian-speaking populations under the rule of the austrian empire was a constant cause of friction between austria and italy , a national state set on the unification of all italians . being part of the triple alliance with germany and austria was '' an embarrassment , if not a contradiction '' for italy . italy 's fear that it would not get what it wanted in the event of a victorious triple alliance caused it to remain neutral during the first year of the war , and the preoccupation that it would n't get what it wanted from a victorious entente either if it remained neutral led it to join the war on the side of the latter . italy conducted intense negotiations with austria , which was prepared to part with trentino in exchange of italy 's neutrality , but italy wanted ( among other things ) to reach the alpine water divide , which it claimed as its 'natural border ' , a demand which austria refused , since it would have meant giving up a territory regarded as personal fief by the habsburg emperors . on 26 april 1915 , italy signed the treaty of london , agreeing to declare war against the central powers in exchange for the unredeemed territories of trentino , gorizia , trieste and dalmatia , as well as the part of german tyrol south of the main alpine divide . alcock 1996 , p . 68 . apart from these territorial gains the alliance change enabled italy to realise its aspiration : italian military dominance in the mediterranean . rusconi 2005 , p . 127-128 . the ideals of irredentism were used to convince the population of the necessity of the war , but the true motive of the political leadership to join the war was their idea that italy should become a great european power . rusconi 2005 , p . 184-185 . war against the austro-hungarian empire was declared may 24 , 1915 . this put tyrol on the front line , which passed through some of the highest mountains in the alps . the ensuing front became known as the '' war in ice and snow '' , as troops occupied the highest mountains and glaciers all year long . twelve metres ( 40 & nbsp ; feet ) of snow were common during the winter of 1915–16 , and tens of thousands of soldiers disappeared in avalanches . the remains of these soldiers are still being uncovered today . the italian alpini , their austrian counterparts ( kaiserjäger , standschützen and landesschützen ) , and the german alpenkorps occupied every hill and mountain top . they began carving extensive fortifications and military quarters , even drilling tunnels inside the mountains and deep into glaciers , like at marmolada . hundreds of troops would drag guns over mountains up to 3,890 & nbsp ; m ( 12,760 & nbsp ; ft ) . streets , cable cars , mountain railways and walkways through the steepest of walls were built . the first to occupy higher ground became almost impossible to dislodge , so both sides turned to drilling tunnels under mountain peaks , filling them up with explosives , then detonating the entire mountain , including its defenders , such as col di lana , monte pasubio , lagazuoi , etc . climbing and skiing became essential skills for the troops of both sides and soon ski battalions and special climbing units were formed . on may 15 , 1916 , the austrian army battle of asiago , unaided by the german army , whose command had advised against such a move . several divisions were withdrawn from the russian front to achieve necessary troop strength . the offensive was of limited tactical success . austrians penetrated twelve miles into italian territory , inflicting heavy casualties on the italians , but fell short of their strategic and political goals . rothenberg 1977 , p . 79-80 . this inconclusive attack weakened the eastern front , which enabled the russian army to overrun austrian positions in galicia and threaten the heart of the habsburg empire rothenberg 1977 , p . 80 . . the armistice . after the battle of asiago in 1916 , which ended in a stalemate and brought only minor territorial gains to austria , the tyrolean frontline remained largely static . the main battles were fought elsewhere . this changed in october , 1918 , with austro-hungarian defeat in the battle of vittorio veneto , the imperial army collapsed and started to withdraw and , on 29 october , the austro-hungarians asked for an armistice . on 30 october 1918 , the austro-hungarian army was split in two . the armistice was signed at 3.20 p.m . , november 3 , to become effective 24 hours later , at 3.00 p.m . , november 4 . following the signing of the armistice , austrian general weber informed his italian counterparts that the imperial army had already laid down its weapons , due to a previous order and requested combat and italian advancement to cease . the italian general pietro badoglio sharply rejected the proposal , and threatened to stop all negotiations and continue the war . general weber repeated the request , with no results . stato maggiore dell'esercito , '' l'esercito italiano nella grande guerra '' , ufficio storico , vol . 5 , tomo 1,2 , 2bis , roma , 1988 even before the order to cease hostilities , the imperial army had already started to collapse , ceasing to exist as a combat force . fritz weber , '' das ende der alten armee . österreich-ungarns zusammenbruch , : split in two the imperial army collapsed , starting a chaotic retiring , since october , 28 . italian troops continued their advance until 3.00 p.m . on november 4 . the occupation of all tyrol , including innsbruck , was completed in the days that followed . under the terms of the austrian-italian armistice of villa giusti , as well as being required to evacuate all territory occupied since august , austria-hungary 's forces were required to withdraw from south tyrol , tarvisio , the soča , gorizia , trieste , istria , western carniola , and dalmatia . terms mandated german forces expulsion from austria-hungary within 15 days or their internment , and the allies were to have free use of austria-hungary 's internal communications . they were also obliged to allow entente armies ' transit , to reach germany from the south . the italian general rodolfo graziani 's 11th italian army continued to advance , supported on the right by the 9th army . the result was that austria-hungary lost about 30,000 casualties and between 300,000 and 500,000 prisoners ( 50,000 by 31 october , 100,000 by 1 november and 428,000 by 4 november ) . italian losses numbered about 38,000 , including 145 french and 374 britons . it appears that the large quantity of prisoners stemmed from the austrian command decision that captivity in italy was preferable to starvation at home . rothenberg 1976 , p . 218 . after the armistice , hundreds of thousands of austrian soldiers without weapons , food and discipline made their way home through the alpine valleys . the alpine villages were caught between the retreating , half-starved soldiers who repeatedly resorted to theft and robbery to survive , and the advancing italian army . at the same time , great numbers of italian war prisoners were making their way south towards their homeland . austria did not have the means to guarantee the orderly retreat of its own army or the organized return of italian war prisoners . pasquali 2007 , p . 113 . in the meantime , italian occupation of tyrol was going as planned . on 11 november , italian troops occupied the brenner pass and the pass at toblach . to secure access to the inn valley , crucial for an advance into southern germany , innsbruck , capital of tyrol , and the village landeck were occupied as well . on 10 january 1919 , the commander of the 3rd army corps , gen . ugo sani , was appointed military governor of northern tyrol with residence in innsbruck . . after world war i . the treaty of saint-germain-en-laye ( 1919 ) ruled that , according to the treaty of london , the southern part of tyrol had to be ceded to the kingdom of italy . italy 's border was pushed northward to the strategically important alpine water divide , including present day-south tyrol with its large german-speaking majority . oscar benvenuto ( ed . ) : '' south tyrol in figures 2008 '' , provincial statistics institute of the autonomous province of south tyrol , bozen/bolzano 2007 , p . 19 , table 11 the northern part of tyrol was retained by the first austrian republic . in 1923 , towns of buchenstein , hayden and verseil were transferred from province of bolzano to province of belluno . also , pedemonte ( includes former municipality of casotto ) was transferred from province of trento to province of vicenza in 1929 , and towns of magasa and valvestino were transferred from province of trento to province of brescia in 1934 .