Dorothy Clutterbuck

biography . clutterbuck was born in british india , and was the daughter of thomas st . quentin clutterbuck , a british army officer . after her father 's retirement , she appears to have moved back to england and to have lived with him in the christchurch area of the new forest in southern england . after her father 's death , she continued to live in the same house alone , but at the age of 55 she married rupert fordham , a local justice of the peace who was of high rank in the salvation army . fordham died in may 1939 in a car accident . clutterbuck appears to have been an outwardly respectable member of the local community , a supporter of the conservative party and the church of england . she left a sizeable legacy to the local anglican priest in her will . her estate was valued at £60,000 , a very large sum for the time . the one scandal attached to her was an allegation that rupert fordham was already married to a mentally ill woman , so that the two were not legally married . clutterbuck had reverted to her maiden name by the time of her death . clutterbuck and wicca . image : latimers.jpg thumb right chewton mill house , the house in highcliffe owned by dorothy and reputedly the site of gardner 's initiation . after her death in 1951 , clutterbuck was identified by gerald gardner as a leading member of the new forest coven of witches into which he claimed to have been initiated in september 1939 . gardner referred to her only as '' old dorothy '' in his publications , but gave her full name to personal acquaintances . gardner 's statements were interpreted by his pupil doreen valiente as implying that clutterbuck had personally initiated him into the coven , but later authors such as philip heselton and eleanor bone claim that his initiator was in fact edith woodford-grimes . some writers , such as historian jeffrey russell , suggested that '' old dorothy '' had been invented by gardner , but valiente , knowing her full name , obtained her birth , marriage and death certificates and published a basic outline of her life in 1985 to prove that she really existed . article by doreen valiente , '' looking for old dorothy '' in , janet farrar , stewart farrar , the witches ' way : principles , rituals and beliefs of modern witchcraft , appendix a , pages 283-293 ( london : guild publishing , 1984 ; book club associates 1985 ) . see also valiente , rebirth of witchcraft , custer , wa : phoenix , 1989 , pp.45–6 . it continues to be debated whether gardner 's claims that clutterbuck was involved in pagan witchcraft were true , or whether gardner used the name of a respectable local worthy as a private joke and to distract attention from his true magical partner , edith woodford-grimes . ronald hutton and leo ruickbie have concluded that clutterbuck is unlikely to have been involved in gardner 's activities , in particular because of her apparent commitment to christianity . hutton also points out that the date of gardner 's initiation would coincide with a period of mourning in 1939 when she had cancelled all other social engagements . conversely , philip heselton has concluded that clutterbuck definitely was involved in occult activities , and that her practice of christianity was social and conventional in nature . the principal body of evidence to which both sides appeal is provided by clutterbuck 's own diaries . the diaries . clutterbuck left three volumes of diaries , which are actually more similar to commonplace books , filled with daily poems and illustrations and intended to be read by visitors to her home . the researchers ronald hutton and philip heselton have both read clutterbuck 's diaries , and have come to entirely different conclusions on their contents . hutton believes that clutterbuck 's poems show her to be a '' simple '' and '' kindly '' woman with no connections with paganism or the occult . heselton , on the other hand , believes that her writings reveal that '' dorothy was a pagan in all but name . '' the evidence cited by heselton and his supporters consists both of the absence of overt christian themes and the apparent presence of pagan sentiments . heselton notes that '' there is hardly a mention of jesus and it seems as if her deepest spiritual experiences come from nature and , particularly , her garden . '' little christian sentiment is expressed , even on christian holidays . of the few direct references to christianity , this for whit sunday 1942 is characteristically oblique : : '' the sunday that comes in the time of the may : with its crown of white blossoms for this sacred day : the essence of this day – the spirit of prayer : brings to us those loved spirits who used to be here '' : : 1942-05-24 '' midsummer , '' heselton says '' is lauded as 'the day of all days most dear ' '' . nature and the feelings of magical enchantment that come from it are commonly repeated themes , as is the theme of a fairy-like dancing maiden , often referred to as 'the queen ' , who seems to personify the seasons and the land . for example : : '' . i knew you were a vision : the loveliest ever seen : but i also knew that you were real : and of my heart , the queen . '' : : 1943-10-27 : '' i am waiting for my lady : for , down the pathway shadey : i think i hear her footfall light : my heart beats wildly with delight : . : i can not wait – the minutes drag : just when i 'm in despair : dear heaven ! she is coming ! and now she 's here ! she 's here ! '' : : 1942-07-30 : '' of all the ladies that i know : there 's only one can please me so : that all her looks and all her ways : make music for me all my days . : for life , i love her , and adore : i only saw her once – not more : but once i saw her , as i say : but once she crossed my path , my way : for ever . she will be my queen : where did i see her ? – in a dream . '' : : 1943-06-21 ( midsummer eve ) the diaries also contain frequent references to fairies and the full moon ; bits of herb-lore , and occasionally vivid descriptions of classical gods such as aurora . other examples seem more ambiguous , and could equally express christian or pagan sentiment , or simple poetic metaphor : : '' then with a flash of scarlet : sweeping across the snows : comes christmas , radiant creature ! : she 's laughing as she goes . the shining holly fills her lap : blue pages hold her train : dear time of lovely memories . so here you are again : there stand the glittering christmas trees : the fires flame and glow : soft fingers tapping on the pane : are fairies , made of snow : the bells ring out , the carols mount : all the old songs are dear : the first most sacred festival : the best of all the year '' : : christmas 1942 . notes and references . -- --