The Call of Cthulhu

inspiration . the first seed of the story 's first chapter the horror in clay came from one of lovecraft 's own dreams he had in 1919 , which he described briefly in two different letters sent to his friend rheinhart kleiner on may 21 and december 14 , 1920 . in the dream , lovecraft is visiting an antiquity museum in providence , attempting to convince the aged curator there to buy an odd bas-relief lovecraft himself had sculpted , who initially scoffs at him for trying to sell something recently made to a museum of antique objects . lovecraft then remembers himself answering the curator with the response : '' why do you say that this thing is new ? the dreams of men are older than brooding egypt or the contemplative sphinx , or garden-girdled babylon , and this was fashioned in my dreams . '' this can be compared to what the character of henry anthony wilcox tells the main character 's uncle while showing him his sculpted bas-relief for help in reading hieroglyphs on it which came through wilcox 's own fantastical dreams : : '' it is new , indeed , for i made it last night in a dream of strange cities ; and dreams are older than brooding tyre or the contemplative sphinx , or garden-girdled babylon . '' lovecraft then used this for a brief synopsis of a new story outlined in his own commonplace book at first in august 1925 , which developed organically out of the idea of what the bas-relief in the dream actually might have depicted . in a footnote for his writing down of his own dream , lovecraft then finished with the suggestion '' add good development & describe nature of bas-relief '' to himself for future reference . cthulhu mythos scholar robert m . price claims the irregular sonnet '' the kraken '' , the kraken , the victorian web written in 1830 by alfred tennyson , was a major inspiration for lovecraft 's story , as both reference a huge aquatic creature sleeping for an eternity at the bottom of the ocean and destined to emerge from its slumber in an apocalyptic age . robert m . price , '' the other name of azathoth '' , introduction to the cthulhu cycle . price credits philip a . shreffler with connecting the poem and the story . s . t . joshi and david e . schultz cited other literary inspirations : guy de maupassant 's '' the horla '' ( 1887 ) , which lovecraft described in supernatural horror in literature as concerning '' an invisible being who.sways the minds of others , and seems to be the vanguard of a horde of extraterrestrial organisms arrived on earth to subjugate and overwhelm mankind '' ; and arthur machen 's '' the novel of the black seal '' ( 1895 ) , which uses the same method of piecing together of disassociated knowledge ( including a random newspaper clipping ) to reveal the survival of a horrific ancient being . s . t . joshi and david e . schultz , '' call of cthulhu , the '' , an h . p . lovecraft encyclopedia , pp . 28–29 . it is also assumed he got inspiration from william scott-elliot 's the story of atlantis ( 1896 ) and the lost lemuria ( 1904 ) , which lovecraft read in 1926 shortly before he started to work on the story . h.p . lovecraft , fortean times magazine price also notes that lovecraft admired the work of lord dunsany , who wrote the gods of pegana ( 1905 ) , which depicts a god constantly lulled to sleep to avoid the consequences of its reawakening . another dunsany work cited by price is a shop in go-by street ( 1919 ) , which stated '' the heaven of the gods who sleep '' , and '' unhappy are they that hear some old god speak while he sleeps being still deep in slumber '' . price , '' the other name of azathoth '' . this passage is also believed to have inspired lovecraft 's entity azathoth , hence the title of price 's essay . the '' slight earthquake '' mentioned in the story is likely the 1925 charlevoix–kamouraska earthquake . s.t . joshi has also cited a . merritt 's novella the moon pool ( 1918 ) which lovecraft 'frequently rhapsodied about ' . joshi says that , 'merritt 's mention of a '' moon-door '' that , when tilted , leads the characters into a lower region of wonder and horror seems similar to the huge door whose inadvertent opening by the sailors causes cthulhu to emerge from r'lyeh' . joshi , s.t . ( 2010 ) i am providence : the life and times of h.p . lovecraft . new york : hippocampus press . 2 vols . vol ii pg . 639 edward guimont has argued that h . g . wells ' the war of the worlds was an influence on '' the call of cthulhu '' , citing the thematic similarities of ancient , powerful , but indifferent aliens associated with deities ; physical similarities between cthulhu and the martians ; and the plot detail of a ship ramming an alien in a temporarily successful but ultimately futile gesture . . plot summary . the story 's narrator , francis wayland thurston , recounts his discovery of various notes left behind by his great uncle , george gammell angell , a prominent professor of semitic languages at brown university in providence , rhode island , who died during the winter of 1926 after being jostled by a '' nautical-looking negro '' . the first chapter , '' the horror in clay '' , concerns a small bas-relief sculpture found among the notes , which the narrator describes : '' my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus , a dragon , and a human caricature . a pulpy , tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings . ” the sculpture is the work of henry anthony wilcox , a student at the rhode island school of design , who based his creation on a delirious dream of '' great cyclopean cities of titanic blocks and sky-flung monoliths , all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror . ” references to both cthulhu and r'lyeh are included in letters written by wilcox . lovecraft has stated wilcox 's residence in his story is actually the fleur-de-lys studios in providence . angell also discovers reports of '' outre mental illnesses and outbreaks of group folly or mania '' around the world ( in new york city , '' hysterical levantines '' mob police ; in california , a theosophist colony dress in white robes while awaiting a '' glorious fulfillment '' ) . the second chapter , '' the tale of inspector legrasse '' , discusses the first time the professor had heard the word '' cthulhu '' and seen a similar image . at the 1908 meeting of the american archaeological society in st . louis , missouri , a new orleans police official named john raymond legrasse asked the assembled antiquarians to identify an idol carved from a mysterious greenish-black stone . legrasse had discovered the relic months before in the swamps south of new orleans , during his raid on a supposed voodoo cult . the idol resembles wilcox 's sculpture , and represented a '' thing , which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy , was of a somewhat bloated corpulence , and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters . ” on november 1 , 1907 , legrasse led a party of fellow policemen in search of several women and children who disappeared from a squatter community . the police found the victims ' '' oddly marred '' bodies being used in a ritual where 100 men—all of a '' mentally aberrant type '' —were '' braying , bellowing , and writhing '' and repeatedly chanting the phrase : '' ph'nglui mglw'nafh cthulhu r'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn '' . after killing five of the participants and arresting 47 others , legrasse interrogated the men before learning '' the central idea of their loathsome faith '' : '' they worshipped , so they said , the great old ones who lived ages before there were any men . and . formed a cult which had never died . hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest cthulhu , from his dark house in the mighty city of r'lyeh under the waters , should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway . some day he would call , when the stars were ready , and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him . '' lovecraft , '' the call of cthulhu '' , p . 139 . the prisoners identify the confiscated idol as cthulhu himself , and translate their mysterious phrase as '' in his house at r'lyeh , dead cthulhu waits dreaming . '' one particularly talkative cultist , known as old castro , named the center of their cult as iram of the pillars in arabia , and referred to a phrase in the necronomicon : '' that is not dead which can eternal lie , and with strange aeons even death may die . ” one of the academics present at the meeting , william channing webb , a professor of anthropology at princeton , states that during an 1860 expedition to the western coast of greenland , he encountered '' a singular tribe of degenerate eskimos whose religion , a curious form of devil-worship , chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness '' . webb claims the greenland cult possessed both the same chant and a similar '' hideous '' fetish . thurston , the narrator , reflects that '' my attitude was still one of absolute materialism , as i wish it still were . ” in the third chapter , '' the madness from the sea '' , thurston reads an article dated april 18 , 1925 , from the sydney bulletin , an australian newspaper . the article reports the discovery of a derelict ship in the pacific ocean with only one survivor—a norwegian sailor named gustaf johansen , second mate on board the emma , a schooner which originally sailed from auckland , new zealand . on march 22 , the emma encountered a heavily armed yacht , the alert , crewed by '' a queer and evil-looking crew of kanakas and half-castes '' from dunedin . after being attacked by the alert without provocation , the crew of the emma killed everyone aboard , but lost their own ship in the battle . commandeering their opponent 's vessel , the surviving crewmembers travel on and arrive at an uncharted island in the vicinity of . with the exception of johansen and a fellow sailor ( who then died as they made their way back to auckland , new zealand due to madness from seeing whatever was on that uncharted island ) , the remaining crewmembers perish on the island . johansen never reveals the cause of their death . thurston travels to new zealand and then australia , where at the australian museum he views a statue retrieved from the alert with a '' cuttlefish head , dragon body , scaly wings , and logogram pedestal '' . while in oslo , thurston learns that johansen died suddenly during an encounter with two lascars near the gothenburg docks . johansen 's widow provides thurston with a manuscript written by her late husband , which reveals the fate of everyone aboard the emma . the uncharted island is described as '' a coastline of mingled mud , ooze , and weedy cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth 's supreme terror—the nightmare corpse-city of r'lyeh '' . the crew struggle in comprehending the non-euclidean geometry of their surroundings . when one of the sailors accidentally opens a '' monstrously carven portal '' , he releases cthulhu : '' it lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway . the stars were right again , and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design , a band of innocent sailors had done by accident . after vigintillions of years , great cthulhu was loose again and ravening for delight . '' before fleeing with his crewmembers , almost all of whom are killed , johansen describes cthulhu as '' a mountain that walked or stumbled '' . johansen and a sailor named briden climb aboard the yacht before sailing away . however , cthulhu dives into the ocean and pursues their fleeing vessel . fortunately , johansen turns his yacht around and rams it into the creature 's head , which bursts with '' a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish '' —only to immediately begin regenerating . the alert escapes from r'lyeh , with briden having gone insane and dying soon afterwards . after finishing the manuscript , thurston realizes he 's now a possible target , thinking : '' i know too much , and the cult still lives . '' . literary significance and criticism . lovecraft regarded the short story as '' rather middling—not as bad as the worst , but full of cheap and cumbrous touches '' . weird tales editor farnsworth wright first rejected the story , and only accepted it after writer donald wandrei , a friend of lovecraft 's , falsely claimed that lovecraft was thinking of submitting it elsewhere . s.t . joshi , more annotated lovecraft , p . 173 . the published story was regarded by robert e . howard ( the creator of conan ) as '' a masterpiece , which i am sure will live as one of the highest achievements of literature . mr . lovecraft holds a unique position in the literary world ; he has grasped , to all intents , the worlds outside our paltry ken '' . quoted in peter cannon , '' introduction '' , more annotated lovecraft , p . 7 . lovecraft scholar peter cannon regarded the story as '' ambitious and complex.a dense and subtle narrative in which the horror gradually builds to cosmic proportions '' , adding '' one of lovecraft 's bleakest fictional expressions of man 's insignificant place in the universe '' . cannon , pp . 6–7 . french novelist michel houellebecq , in his book h . p . lovecraft : against the world , against life , described the story as the first of lovecraft 's '' great texts '' . michel houellebecq , h . p . lovecraft : against the world , against life . canadian mathematician benjamin k . tippett noted that the phenomena described in johansen 's journal may be interpreted as '' observable consequences of a localized bubble of spacetime curvature '' , and proposed a suitable mathematical model . e . f . bleiler has referred to '' the call of cthulhu '' as '' a fragmented essay with narrative inclusions '' . e.f . bleiler , supernatural fiction writers vol , ny : scribners , 1985 , p . 478 . adaptations . parts of the story were adapted in eerie 4 by archie goodwin and gray morrow and in the avengers 88 by harlan ellison , roy thomas , and sal buscema . alberto breccia illustrated an eleven-page story in 1974 . the story was produced as a silent film of the same name in 2005 , and as a 1920s-style radio drama , dark adventure radio theatre : the call of cthulhu , in 2012 . in 2005 , the survival horror video game call of cthulhu : dark corners of the earth was released for xbox and windows pc . call girl of cthulhu , released in 2014 , was an indie horror film directed by chris lamartina , loosely based on lovecraft 's writings . thrash metal band metallica released an instrumental track called '' the call of ktulu '' on their 1984 album ride the lightning . in addition , they released '' the thing that should not be '' on their 1986 album master of puppets , '' all nightmare long '' on 2008 's death magnetic , and '' dream no more '' on 2016 's hardwired . to self-destruct , all dedicated to lovecraft 's cthulhu , as well as the band 's ex-bassist , cliff burton , who died in a bus accident in 1986 , while touring in support of their album master of puppets . metal band iron maiden used the text '' that is not dead which can eternal lie , yet with strange aeons even death may die '' as an inscription on a gravestone on the cover of their album '' live after death '' ( 1985 ) . also h.p . lovecraft is mentioned as the writer . in 2018 , a survival horror role-playing video game called call of cthulhu : the official video game was developed for playstation 4 , xbox one , and windows pc . in 2020 , elements of the call of cthulhu were adapted in the science fiction horror film underwater , directed by william eubank and released by 20th century fox . in 2018 , the villain black manta in the movie aquaman directed by james wan and released by dc quotes '' the call of chulthu '' : '' loathsomeness waits , and dreams in the deep , and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men '' . see also . cthulhu mythos cthulhu mythos in popular culture . notes . references . definitive version . with explanatory footnotes . a collection of works that inspired and were inspired by the call of cthulhu , with commentary . external links . the gods of pegana , lord dunsany ; complete text at wikisource '' the horla '' , guy de maupassant ; complete text at wikisource '' the novel of the black seal '' , arthur machen ; complete text at project gutenberg of australia interactive for ipad , the call of cthulhu