Fulcrum (newspaper)

the fulcrum debuts . in 1942 , the university of ottawa 's english debating society published the inaugural edition of their newsletter , entitled the fulcrum . the newsletter was supervised by rev . lorenzo danis , omi , and its first editor-in-chief was john beahen . the premiere edition included as its mission statement the following : '' the fulcrum is dedicated entirely to the interests of our students of today and yesterday . '' in its first year , the fulcrum was funded almost entirely by alumni donations and published only 8 issues per year . due to its conservative catholic editorial policies , the fulcrum was fairly non-controversial compared to its more outspoken counterpart , la rotonde . the inclusion of advertising starting in its second year allowed the paper some slight financial freedom and the fulcrum continued in this manner until 1946 , when it came under the supervision of the english students ' association and the sfuo . in 1947 , the fulcrum became a member of the canadian university press , a national cooperative linking student newspapers across canada . . in the 50s and 60s . in 1951 , the sfuo ( suffering from serious financial problems ) proposed that the fulcrum and la rotonde be combined into one publication and renamed the ottawa . the proposal was rejected , but operations at the two papers were condensed into one workspace in the house the sfuo occupied at the time . throughout the 1950s , la rotonde and the university of ottawa administration had a combative relationship , inciting the canadian university press to label la rotonde as '' the most censored student newspaper in canada '' in 1956 . the ill-will between the two groups reached a climax in 1958 , when three editors from la rotonde were expelled for an article criticizing queen elizabeth ii . la rotonde ceased publishing after this and was not re-formed again until january 1959 . despite the atmosphere on campus , the fulcrum continued to publish during this time . both the fulcrum and la rotonde continued to publish unabated throughout most of the 1960s , with la rotonde continuing with its outspoken approach , and the fulcrum often playing the mediator and aiming criticism at both parties . however , this began to change in 1964 , when the university of ottawa administration censored an article in la rotonde espousing the opinion that queen elizabeth ii was not welcome in quebec . the fulcrum spoke out on the issue and in an editorial at the time stated that : '' we feel that the administration should have given the publishers of la rotonde a chance to act . the publishers ( the students ' union ) are the ones who should have the right to confiscate an issue of a student newspaper , or any part thereof '' . following from this , the fulcrum became a more outspoken voice on campus . in 1969 , both publications were canceled and replaced with a bilingual monthly entitled id , directed by ian green . the official reason for the cancellation of the fulcrum and la rotonde and the subsequent launch of id was a lack of student interest in both newspapers ; however , it was during this time that canada was enveloped in the polarizing events of the october crisis , and many attribute the climate on campus and cancellation of the opposing-language newspapers to these events . in the 70s , 80s , and 90s . in 1970 , both newspapers were re-instated and continued to publish regularly as services of the student federation of the university of ottawa ( which incorporated in 1969 ) . the next three decades were quieter and both newspapers were able to achieve a stability on campus , buoyed by the receipt of a guaranteed student levy voted on in a referendum by u of o students . the relationship between the university administration and both newspapers gradually became more distant during this time , and ( as the publisher of both papers ) the sfuo began to step in to moderate and control content when the sfuo felt it was needed . however , the ability of the sfuo to pull any content they deemed questionable quickly lead to dissent on the part of both newspapers and questions of censorship arose . the sfuo stepped in several times during these decades to censor issues that were objectionable or could have been construed as libel , much to the chagrin of editors at both papers . fueled by their lack of control over their publication and an increasing move towards autonomy in student newspapers across the country , editors at the fulcrum began formulating plans to go '' autonomous '' as early as 1998 , but many stalled attempts meant that they were not successful until many years later . it was during this time that the fulcrum moved to offices located between university of ottawa 's thompson residence and morriset library ( later occupied by chuo-fm , and now known as the déjà vu lounge ) . in 1989 , the fulcrum was relocated to the basement of 631 king edward ave . across from the main campus in a university of ottawa building . in the 21st century . in 1999 , after several years of a rocky relationship with the ottawa gaming club ( who occupied the first floor of 631 king edward ave . ) the fulcrum was granted the first and second floor of the building as their new offices . it was also in 1999 that '' the fulcrum '' began to make more use of digital technology , switching from more traditional layout techniques to computer layout , and switching over to digital photography , beginning with digital contributions by steven meece . beginning in the 2003-2004 school year , the paper began referring to itself as university of ottawa 's fulcrum , rather than the fulcrum , on the cover . in the summer of 2004 , recently elected editor-in-chief mary cummins and managing editor marcus mccann once again looked into plans to become an autonomously incorporated organization . this push was spurred on by the sfuo attempting to pull the summer 2004 issue of the fulcrum for featuring a mug of beer and using the term '' frosh '' ( the sfuo had recently stopped using the term frosh in favour of welcome week and later 101 week due to negative connotations associated with the term ) . aside from this , the separation was due to several reasons . the main reason being that the editorial board felt it was an inherent conflict of interest to be owned by the student government while attempting to write fair , unbiased , and often critical stories about them . the secondary reason was that as an autonomous corporation , the fulcrum was able to directly control its own finances and spur further growth of the paper . after discussing the situation with then-president of the sfuo philippe laliberté , plans were made to begin the process . in october 2004 , a letters patent was granted to '' the fulcrum publishing society '' , the corporation that would take over the governance of the fulcrum , and negotiations between the sfuo and the fulcrum continued throughout the year . after approval by the sfuo 's board of administration , ownership of the fulcrum officially transferred to the fulcrum publishing society on june 1 , 2005 . the fulcrum publishing society was set up to be governed by a ten-member board of directors made up of students , community members , fulcrum staff , u of o faculty , and fulcrum alumni . ultimate responsibility for the governance and management of the corporation was left with the board while the president , who acted as the business manager , made decisions on a day-to-day basis . to avoid a similar conflict of interest , provisions were put into the corporate bylaws prohibiting the board from interfering in editorial content unless faced with possible legal action . after a turbulent first year , the fulcrum settled into a financially stable position as an autonomous corporation . recent changes to the governance structures of the corporation have led to slight changes , such as the business ( now general ) manager no longer being permitted to hold a seat on the board , and the roles of the corporation 's executives being clarified . in 2014-15 , the newspaper received a complete visual redesign including a new layout and logo . national defence ad boycott . on march 19 , 2008 , the fulcrum held its annual general meeting , normally a fairly subdued event . however , the 2008 agm saw a group of students mobilize to try to create an ad boycott for the purpose of stopping recruitment ads for the canadian forces being run by the department of national defence , which those students found objectionable . the meeting was contentious , and the first vote , which came out against the boycott 73-69 , was challenged and retaken . on the second vote , it passed by a vote of 93-85 , binding the fulcrum to cease accepting ads from the department of national defence as of may 1 , 2008 . most of the fulcrum 's editorial board and staff members were against the boycott . on february 6 , 2009 the fulcrum held its annual general meeting and the topic of boycott lists emerged again . a motion was presented to remove the advertising boycott list and it was passed unanimously by a vote of 38-0 . transition to online . the fulcrum transitioned to an online only news source for the 2019/2020 publication year . this completed the transition which saw the paper only publish one print paper a month for the 2018/2019 publication year . editorial board . board of directors/general manager . current board of directors . president : justin turcotte ( community rep ) vice president : kalki nagaratnam ( student rep ) chief of staff : katelyn murray ( continuity rep ) chair : benjamin king ( student rep ) director : david champion-smith ( fulcrum alumnus ) director : ryan pepper ( staff rep ) director : julia d'silva ( student rep ) ex-officio : rame abdulkader ( general manager ) ex-officio : charley dutil ( editor-in-chief ) ex-officio : leyla abdolell ( online editor ) . presidents . 2019-present : justin turcotte 2016-2019 : raghad sheikh-khalil 2015-2016 : mackenzie gray 2014-2015 : keeton wilcock 2013-2014 : kyle hansford/keeton wilcock 2012-2013 : mercedes mueller 2011-2012 : andrew hawley 2010-2011 : scott bedard 2009-2010 : nick taylor-vaisey 2008-2009 : ross prusakowski 2006-2008 : rob fishbook 2005-2006 : mary cummins . general managers . 2020-present : rame abdulkader 2018-2020 : dorian ghosn 2016–2018 : lucas ghosn 2015-2016 : dayne moyer 2012-2015 : andrew hawley 2011-2012 : danielle vicha 2010-2011 : david mcclelland 2009-2010 : frank appleyard 2008-2009 : ross prusakowski 2006-2008 : rob fishbook 2005-2006 : mary cummins . see also . list of student newspapers in canada list of newspapers in canada