Igraine

geoffrey of monmouth and welsh tradition . in geoffrey of monmouth 's historia regum britanniae , igerna enters the story as the wife of gorlois , duke of cornwall . king uther pendragon falls in love with her and attempts to force his attentions on her at his court . she informs her husband , who departs with her to cornwall without asking leave . this sudden departure gives uther pendragon an excuse to make war on gorlois . gorlois conducts the war from the castle of dimilioc but places his wife in safety in tintagel castle . disguised as gorlois by merlin , uther pendragon is able to enter tintagel to satisfy his lust . he manages to rape igraine by deceit – she believes that she is lying with her husband and becomes pregnant with arthur . her husband gorlois dies in battle that same night . geoffrey does not say , and later accounts disagree , as to whether gorlois died before or after arthur was begotten ( something that might be important in determining whether or not a child could be made legitimate by a later marriage to its true father ) . uther pendragon later marries igraine . according to geoffrey , igraine also bore a daughter , anna , to uther pendragon , and this anna later becoming the mother of gawain and mordred . yet geoffrey also refers to king hoel of brittany as arthur 's nephew and presents a prophecy that to uther 's daughter will be born a line of seven kings , something true if hoel is anna 's son , but not true if only gawain or mordred are anna 's sons . there is confusion here , especially as welsh genealogies name an anna as hoel 's mother , but one not connected to uther pendragon . in medieval welsh literature and genealogical tracts , eigr is one of several children of amlawdd wledig . her siblings include gwyar , the mother of gwalchmai ( gawain ) , who is mentioned in culhwch and olwen . the same source mentions gormant son of rica , half-brother to arthur on his mother 's side , while his father is the chief elder of cornwall . other medieval accounts . in robert de boron 's poem merlin , igraine 's previous husband is an unnamed duke of tintagel and it is by him that she becomes the mother of two unnamed daughters . one marries king lot and by him becomes the mother of gawain , mordred , gareth and gaheris . a second daughter , also unnamed in some variants but in some named morgaine , is married to king nentres of garlot , who is identified with budic ii of brittany . according to robert de boron , igraine died before her second husband . a third illegitimate daughter of the duke of tintagel is sent to a school and there learns so much she becomes the great sorceress morgan le fay ( no other medieval accounts state that morgan is illegitimate and therefore , as in this version , arthur 's stepsister ) . in the lancelot-grail cycle 's vulgate merlin , igraine is provided with two earlier husbands , one named hoel who is the father of two daughters : gawain 's mother and a daughter named blasine who marries king nentres of garlot . ( it is possible this hoel derives from geoffrey 's confused statement that igraine 's eldest daughter had by her first husband howel which was misunderstood to refer instead to a supposed first husband of igraine named howel/hoel . ) after hoel 's death ygraine marries the duke of tintagel and by him becomes mother of three more daughters : a third daughter who marries a king briadas and becomes mother of king angusel of scotland ( in no other extant text made arthur 's nephew ) , a fourth daughter named hermesent who marries king urien of rheged and becomes mother of ywain the great , and a fifth daughter , morgan . in the post-vulgate cycle and thomas malory 's le morte d'arthur , it is morgan le fay who becomes the wife of king urien and mother of ywain ( and malory adds this information ) . in other accounts ywain is not arthur 's nephew , although sometimes he is gawain 's cousin when their respective fathers are presented as brothers . in the brut tysilio , duke cador of cornwall is the son of gorlois , one would guess by igraine . the same appears in john hardyng 's chronicle where cador is called arthur 's brother '' of his mother 's syde '' . opposing views appear in layamon 's brut where cador appears first as a leader who takes charge of uther 's host when they are attacked by gorlois while uther is secretly lying beside igraine in tintagel . in the english alliterative morte arthure , cador is continually called arthur 's '' cousin '' . le morte d'arthur names the first daughter morgause , the second elayne and the third morgan ( with no mention of morgan 's illegitimacy ) . lancelot is the son of arthur 's sister clarine in ulrich von zatzikhoven 's lanzelet , caradoc is arthur 's sister 's son in the prose lancelot , percival is son of arthur 's sister acheflour in the english romance syr percyvelle . arthurian tales are not consistent with one another and sisters of arthur seem to have been created at desire by any storyteller who wished to make a hero into arthur 's nephew . the lancelot-grail relates that when igraine became uther 's wife she left behind in the dukedom of tintagel a son of the duke of tintagel by a previous marriage . some romances show her alive after uther 's death . in chrétien de troyes ' perceval , the story of the grail she and her daughter gawain 's mother are discovered by gawain in an enchanted castle named the castle of marvels , after he had thought both his mother and grandmother to be long dead . this same account appears in wolfram von eschenbach 's parzival and in heinrich von dem türlin 's diu crône . in both of these it is explained that igraine was abducted ( and it is hinted that she was willingly abducted ) by the magician who has enchanted the castle . in the french livre d'artus , an incomplete alternate conclusion to the french vulgate merlin , it is mentioned that ygraine dwells hidden in corbenic , the castle of the holy grail . this is apparently a version of the same tradition since in the late lancelot-grail , the enchantments of the grail castle are very similar to and seem to be based on the enchantments found in chrétien 's castle of marvels . modern fiction . jack whyte 's a dream of eagles portrays igraine as the daughter of athol , a ruler from ireland . she is married off to lot , the duke of cornwall . she flees the cruel lot for his arch enemy , uther pendragon . she is killed by derek , king of ravenglass , one of lot 's allies , shortly after he kills uther . she dies telling merlyn , uther 's cousin and commander of the forces of camulod , of her son by uther , arthur pendragon . in the bbc series merlin , ygraine is the wife of uther , but dead for many years by the time the events of the series begins . she could not conceive , and so uther asked for the help of the sorceress nimueh so that they could have a child . igraine gives birth to arthur , but because magic was invoked in his conception , uther had to pay the price of asking for a life from magic—that of losing the life of someone he treasured equally , his wife . it is igraine 's death that sparks uther 's hatred and persecution of all magic users within his kingdom . in the 2017 film king arthur : legend of the sword , igraine is portrayed by poppy delevingne . at the beginning , when she attempts to escape with her husband uther by row boat during a coup set up by her brother-in-law vortigan , she is killed by a spear thrown by vortigan in his demon knight form . see also . king arthur 's family . external links . igraine and uther and igraine at the camelot project