Yamaguchi Prefecture

history . yamaguchi prefecture was created by the merger of the provinces of suō and nagato . nussbaum , '' provinces and prefectures '' in . during the rise of the samurai class during the heian and kamakura periods ( 794–1333 ) , the ouchi family of suō province and the koto family of nagato province gained influence as powerful warrior clans . in the muromachi period ( 1336—1573 ) , ouchi hiroyo , the 24th ruler of the ouchi family conquered both areas of yamaguchi prefecture . the ouchi clan imitated the city planning of kyoto . they gained great wealth through cultural imports from the continent and trade with korea and ming dynasty china . as a result , yamaguchi came to be known as the '' kyoto of the west , '' and ouchi culture flourished . sue harutaka defeated the 31st ruler of the ouchi clan . the sue clan was then defeated by mōri motonari , and the mōri family gained control of the chūgoku region . yamaguchi was ruled as part of the mōri clan domain during the sengoku period . mōri terumoto was then defeated by tokugawa ieyasu in the battle of sekigahara in 1600 . he was forced to give up all his land except for the suō and nagato areas ( current-day yamaguchi prefecture ) , where he built his castle in hagi . mōri sought to strengthen the economic base of the region and increase local production with his three whites campaign ( salt , rice , and paper ) . after commodore matthew perry 's opening of japan , clans from nagato ( also called chōshū ) played a key role in the fall of the tokugawa shogunate and the establishment of the new imperial government . four years after the edo shogunate was overthrown and the meiji government formed in 1868 , the present yamaguchi prefecture was established . the meiji government brought in many new systems and modern policies , and promoted the introduction of modern industry , though the prefecture was still centered on agriculture during this period . in the taishō period , from 1912 to 1926 , shipbuilding , chemical , machinery , and metal working plants were built in yamaguchi 's harbors in the seto inland sea area . during the post-world war ii shōwa period , yamaguchi developed into one of the most industrialized prefectures in the country due to the establishment of petrochemical complexes . the history of yamaguchi prefecture . geography . as of april 1 , 2012 , 7 % of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as natural parks , namely the setonaikai national park ; akiyoshidai , kita-nagato kaigan , and nishi-chūgoku sanchi quasi-national parks ; and chōmonkyō , iwakiyama , rakanzan , and toyota prefectural natural parks . . cities . thirteen cities are located in yamaguchi prefecture : hagi hikari hōfu iwakuni kudamatsu mine nagato san'yō-onoda shimonoseki shūnan ube yamaguchi ( capital ) yanai . towns and districts . these are the towns in each district : abu district abu kuga district waki kumage district hirao kaminoseki tabuse ōshima district suō-ōshima . mergers . . economic development . for the purposes of development analysis , yamaguchi is construed to be part of northern kyushu . although yamaguchi is not part of the island of kyushu , it has become a functional satellite of the kanmon straits metropolitan area . sakamoto , hiroshi . ( 2011 ) . '' cge analysis of regional policy in the northern kyushu area . '' kitakyushu : the international centre for the study of east asian development ( icsead ) , working paper series vol . 2011-03 . demographics . per japanese census data , yamaguchi 1995-2020 population statistics and , yamaguchi 1920-2000 population statistics yamaguchi prefecture has had negative population growth from 1955-1973 and 1985-onwards . tourism . the most popular place for tourism is shimonoseki , for example karato fish market . there is a large fireworks festival in summer . another attraction is the kintai bridge in the town of iwakuni . this five-arched wooden structure is considered a symbol of western honshū . the area on the banks of the nishiki river close to the bridge is considered among the best places in japan for hanami , when groups of family and friends gather in early april to view cherry blossoms . hagi city is in the north of yamaguchi . it is a very traditional city . the usual color of japanese post boxes is red , but in hagi they are painted green or brown . the hagi museum is modeled after a traditional samurai residence . the exhibits are detailed and realistic , and are changed every year . the permanent collection is data about hagi 's history and collections about takasugi shinsaku . hagi also contains a reverberatory furnace which has been designated a world heritage site . kawara soba ( hot tile noodles ) is a popular food in yamaguchi . it was developed during the seinan rebellion that broke out in 1877 . soldiers cooked wild grass and meat on hot tiles . now it is a local dish of yamaguchi people . they fry green tea noodles on a hot tile , and arrange thin fried egg , stewed beef , green onions and grilled liver on top . akiyoshidai quasi-national park , which includes japan 's longest cave , the , is another popular destination . file : akiyoshi plateau from akiyoshidai karst observation deck ( north ) . jpg akiyoshi plateau file : from iwakuni castle , 岩国城から - panoramio.jpg kintai bridge in iwakuni . famous festivals and events . kintaikyo festival in iwakuni - held on april 29 nishiki river water festival in iwakuni - held in august iwakuni festival in august yokomichi festival , kintai bridge november 19 yanai goldfish lantern festival in august yamaguchi gion festival on july 20 to 27 yamaguchi tanabata lantern festival on august 6 to 7 hagi era festival in april hagi festival on august 2 to 3 shimonoseki strait festival on may 2 to 4 shimonoseki firework festival in august . education . high schools . noda gakuen . universities . baiko gakuin university ( private ) national fisheries university ( national ) shimonoseki city university ( public ) tokyo university of science , yamaguchi ( public ) ube frontier university ( private ) university of east asia ( private ) yamaguchi gakugei college ( private ) yamaguchi prefectural university ( public ) yamaguchi university ( national ) yamaguchi university of human welfare and culture ( private ) . transportation . ferries from shimonoseki port international terminal . two ferry services provide regular sea transport from the shimonoseki port international terminal : kanpu ferry provides round-trip service to busan , south korea ; the orient ferry provides round-trip service to qingdao and shanghai , respectively . kanpu ferry to pusan in south korea regularly gwangyang beech to gwangyang in south korea regularly orient ferry to qingdao in china regularly orient ferry to shanghai in china regularly . other ferry routes . shunan-kunisaki , kyushu yanai-matsuyama , shikoku . air . yamaguchi ube airport ( to haneda airport ( tokyo ) ) . iwakuni kintaikyo airport ( to haneda airport ( tokyo ) and naha airport ( okinawa ) ) . railway . west japan railway company sanyō shinkansen sanyō main line sanin line yamaguchi line gantoku line onoda line mine line ube line nishikigawa railway . roads . . expressways . sanyo expressway chūgoku expressway . toll roads . hagi misumi road kanmon bridge yamaguchi ube onoda road ogori hagi road kanmon road tunnel . national highways . route 2 route 9 route 187 ( iwakuni-tsuwano-masuda ) route 188 ( iwakuni-yanai-hikari-kudamatsu ) route 189 route 190 route 191 route 262 route 315 ( shunan-hagi ) route 316 route 376 ( yamaguchi-shunan-iwakuni ) route 434 route 435 route 437 route 489 route 490 route 491 . prefectural symbols . tree : red pine tree ( pinus densiflora ) flower : amanatsu ( citrus natsudaidai ) bird : hooded crane ( grus monacha ) fish : tetraodontidae ( takifugu rubripes ) beast : sika deer ( cervus nippon nippon ) mascot : choruru . media . newspapers . yamaguchi shimbun . tv . yab tv ( ann ) kry tv ( nnn ) tys tv ( jnn ) nhk tv tss tv/tnc tv ( fnn ) . radio . fmy ( jfn ) . notable people from yamaguchi prefecture . shintaro abe , former minister of foreign affairs and general secretary of the ldp prime minister shinzō abe represented first yamaguchi 's 1st then 4th district in the house of representatives ; his father represented yamaguchi as well . itō hirobumi , a samurai of chōshū domain , japanese statesman , four-time prime minister of japan ( the 1st , 5th , 7th and 10th ) , genrō , and resident-general of korea shojiro iida , a japanese general during world war ii who led the invasions of thailand and burma former prime minister naoto kan , born in ube in 1946 kantei bio notes kasumi ishikawa , silver medalist in women 's team table tennis at the london 2012 olympics , is from yamaguchi city in yamaguchi prefecture . kaiketsu masateru , sumo wrestler , who reached the second highest rank of ōzeki on two separate occasions and was chairman of the japan sumo association 2010-2012 sōyū matsuoka , an important , early pioneer of sōtō buddhism in the united states karyu , guitarist of the band d'espairsray is from yamaguchi . the band had a '' homecoming '' live there in 2007 and 2009 sayumi michishige , a japanese idol who is one of the sixth-generation members of japanese idol group morning musume was born in yamaguchi . shinji mikami , video game designer ; the god-father of the survival horror genre of video games . yasunori mitsuda , composer yoshiyuki sadamoto , a japanese character designer , manga artist , and one of the founding members of the gainax anime studio shaura , singer kido takayoshi , one of the two main architects of the meiji restoration atsushi tamura of the comic duo london boots ichi-go ni-go is from shimonoseki in yamaguchi . raizo tanaka , a japanese rear admiral during world war ii teruzane utada music producer , manager and father of utada hikaru is from yamaguchi prefecture , as mentioned on the latter 's blog . harukichi yamaguchi , founder of the yamaguchi-gumi , born near kobe but his entire family hailed from yamaguchi tadashi yanai , a japanese businessman , founder and president of fast retailing , of which uniqlo is a subsidiary kairi sane , professional wrestler currently signed to wwe and former world wonder ring stardom employee . hideaki anno , anime director famous for creating neon genesis evangelion . his live-action film shiki-jitsu features scenes set in his hometown of ube . sister districts . yamaguchi prefecture has alliance with the following five districts . bình dương province , vietnam ( since 2014 ) shandong province , china ( since 1982 ) south gyeongsang province , south korea ( since 1987 ) pamplona , navarre , spain ( since 1980 ) krasnodar krai , russia ( since 2017 ) . politics . since the meiji restoration in which lower-rank nobility from chōshū played a major role , many politicians from yamaguchi have held important positions in national politics . in the post-war era , the most prominent political family from yamaguchi is the kishi-abe/satō prime ministerial dynasty , and yamaguchi is leaning solidly towards the liberal democratic party ( ldp ) . delegation to the national diet . since the electoral reform of the 1990s , yamaguchi elects four members directly to the house of representatives . three of the new single-member districts have been held exclusively by liberal democrats as of 2013 , the easternmost district bordering hiroshima was initially won by shinji satō ( eisaku satō 's son ) in 1996 , but went to democrat hideo hiraoka in several later elections . currently , following the 2014 general election , yamaguchi 's directly elected delegation to the lower house consists of ldp president shinzō abe ( 4th district , 8th term ) , ldp vice president masahiko kōmura ( 1st district , 12th term ) , the chairman of the house of representatives rules committee ( as of 190th diet , january 2016 ) , house of representatives : leadership , committee chairs and other officials takeo kawamura ( 3rd district , 9th term ) , and the chairman of the foreign affairs committee , abe 's brother nobuo kishi ( 2nd district , 2nd term , former two-term member of the house of councillors ) . for the proportional representation segment of the house of representatives , yamaguchi forms part of the chūgoku block . in the house of councillors , yamaguchi is represented by two members , making it one of the currently 31 winner-take-all single-member districts . as of 2013 , the two members are yoshimasa hayashi ( ldp , 4th term , up in 2019 ) , agriculture minister in the 2nd abe cabinet , and following the april 2013 by-election to replace nobuo kishi , kiyoshi ejima ( ldp , 1st term , up in 2016 ) , former mayor of shimonoseki city . governor . the current governor of yamaguchi is former mic bureaucrat tsugumasa muraoka . he won the 2014 yamaguchi gubernatorial election with more than 60 % of the vote against other two candidates , and succeeded shigetarō yamamoto who had been hospitalized since october 2013 and resigned in january 2014 . elected governors of yamaguchi have been : tatsuo tanaka , 1947–1953 ( 2 terms , resigned mid-term to enter national politics ) , the son of pre-war prime minister baron giichi tanaka tarō ozawa , 1953–1960 ( 2 terms , resigned mid-term to enter national politics ) , tanaka 's son-in-law masayuki hashimoto , 1960–1976 ( 4 terms ) , previously member of the house of representatives from yamaguchi for the ldp tōru hirai , 1976–1996 ( 5 terms ) , previously home affairs ministry bureaucrat and vice-governor of yamaguchi under hashimoto sekinari nii , 1996–2012 ( 4 terms ) , previously home affairs ministry bureaucrat and treasurer of yamaguchi under hirai shigetarō yamamoto , 2012–2014 ( 1 term , resigned for health reasons ) , former ldp candidate for the house of representatives in yamaguchi 's 2nd district . assembly . the prefectural assembly of yamaguchi has 47 members , elected in unified local elections in 15 electoral districts : 5 single-member districts , four two-member districts and six districts that elect each between four and nine members . yamaguchi prefectural assembly : electoral districts and district magnitudes in the 2015 election , the ldp won a majority . liberal democrats form several parliamentary groups together with independents . as of june 8 , 2015 , the assembly is composed as follows : ldp 24 members , ldp shinseikai 5 , kōmeitō 5 , dpj/rengō no kai 4 , ldp kensei club 2 , jcp 2 , sdp/citizens league 2 , and the independent '' groups '' shinsei club , mushozoku no kai and kusa no ne have one member each . yamaguchi prefectural assembly : composition by group . notes . references . nussbaum , louis-frédéric and käthe roth . ( 2005 ) . japan encyclopedia . cambridge : harvard university press . ; . external links . official yamaguchi prefecture homepage