Battle of Inkerman

prelude to the battle . the allied armies of britain , france , sardinia , and the ottoman empire had landed on the west coast of crimea on 14 september 1854 , intending to capture the russian naval base at sevastopol . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history ( picador publishing : new york , 2010 ) p . 203 . the allied armies fought off and defeated the russian army at the battle of alma , forcing them to retreat in some confusion toward the river kacha . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , pp . 215-216 . while the allies could have taken this opportunity to attack sevastopol before sevastopol could be put into a proper state of defence , the allied commanders , british general fitzroy somerset , 1st baron raglan and the french commander françois certain canrobert could not agree on a plan of attack . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 222 . instead , they resolved to march around the city , and put sevastopol under siege . toward this end the allies marched to the southern coast of the crimean peninsula and established a supply port at the city of balaklava . orlando , the crimean war : a history , p . 225 . however , before the siege of sevastopol began , the russian commander prince menshikov evacuated sevastopol with the major portion of his field army , leaving only a garrison to defend the city . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 241 . on 25 october 1854 , a superior russian force attacked the british base at balaclava , and although the russian attack was foiled before it could reach the base , the russians were left holding a strong position north of the british line . balaclava revealed the allied weakness ; their siege lines were so long they did not have sufficient troops to man them . realising this , menshikov launched an attack across the tchernaya river on 4 november 1854 . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history ( picador publishing : new york , 2010 ) p . 258 . . battle . assault . on 5 november 1854 , the russian 10th division , under lt . general , launched a heavy attack on the allied right flank atop home hill east from the russian position on shell hill . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , pp . 257-259 . the assault was made by two columns of 35,000 men and 134 field artillery guns orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 257 . of the russian 10th division . when combined with other russian forces in the area , the russian attacking force would form a formidable army of some 42,000 men . the initial russian assault was to be received by the british second division dug in on home hill with only 2,700 men and 12 guns . both russian columns moved in a flanking fashion east towards the british . they hoped to overwhelm this portion of the allied army before reinforcements could arrive . the fog of the early morning hours aided the russians by hiding their approach . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 258 . not all the russian troops could fit on the narrow 300-meter-wide heights of shell hill . accordingly , general soymonov had followed prince alexander menshikov 's directive and deployed some of his force around the careenage ravine . furthermore , on the night before the attack , soymonov was ordered by general peter a . dannenberg to send part of his force north and east to the inkerman bridge to cover the crossing of russian troop reinforcements under lt . general . thus , soymonov could not effectively employ all of his troops in the attack . when dawn broke , soymonov attacked the british positions on home hill with 6,300 men from the kolyvansky , ekaterinburg and tomsky regiments . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 259 . soymonov also had a further 9,000 in reserve . the british had strong pickets and had ample warning of the russian attack despite the early morning fog . the pickets , some of them at company strength , engaged the russians as they moved to attack . the firing in the valley also gave warning to the rest of the second division , who rushed to their defensive positions . de lacy evans , commander of the british second division , had been injured in a fall from his horse so command of the second division was taken up by john lysaght pennefather , a highly aggressive officer . pennefather did not know that he was facing a superior russian force . thus he abandoned evans ' plan of falling back to draw the russians within range of the british field artillery which was hidden behind home hill . instead , pennefather ordered his 2,700 strong division to attack . when they did so , the second division faced some 15,300 russian soldiers . russian guns bombarded home hill , but there were no troops on the crest at this point . the second division in action ; the russians in the valley . the russian infantry , advancing through the fog , were met by the advancing second division , who opened fire with their pattern 1853 enfield rifles , whereas the russians were still armed with smoothbore muskets . myatt , f . ( 1979 ) : the illustrated encyclopedia of 19th century firearms . salamander books , new york , page 50 the russians were forced into a bottleneck owing to the shape of the valley , and came out on the second division 's left flank . the rifled minié balls of the british rifles proved deadly accurate against the russian attack . orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 260 . those russian troops that survived were pushed back at bayonet point . eventually , the russian infantry were pushed all the way back to their own artillery positions . the russians launched a second attack , also on the second division 's left flank , but this time in much larger numbers and led by soymonov himself . captain hugh rowlands , in charge of the british pickets , reported that the russians charged '' with the most fiendish yells you can imagine . '' orlando figes , the crimean war : a history , p . 259 at this point , after the second attack , the british position was incredibly weak . if soymonov had known the condition of the british , he would have ordered a third attack before the british reinforcements arrived . such a third attack might well have succeeded , but soymonov could not see in the fog and thus did not know of the desperate situation of the british . instead , he awaited the arrival of his own reinforcements—general pavlov 's men who were making their way toward the inkerman battlefield in four different prong attacks from the north . see the map on page xxx of orlando figes , the crimean war . however , the british reinforcements arrived in the form of the light division which came up and immediately launched a counterattack along the left flank of the russian front , forcing the russians back . during this fighting soymonov was killed by a british rifleman . russian command was immediately taken up by colonel pristovoitov , who was himself shot a few minutes later . colonel uvazhnov-aleksandrov assumed command of the russian forces . shortly after , uvazhnov-aleksandrov was also killed in the withering british fire . at this point , no officer seemed keen to take up command and captain andrianov was sent off on his horse to consult with various generals about the problem . the rest of the russian column proceeded down to the valley where they were attacked by british artillery and pickets , eventually being driven off . the resistance of the british troops here had blunted all of the initial russian attacks . general paulov , leading the russian second column of some 15,000 , attacked the british positions on sandbag battery . as they approached , the 300 british defenders vaulted the wall and charged with the bayonet , driving off the leading russian battalions . five russian battalions were assailed in the flanks by the british 41st regiment , who drove them back to the river chernaya . home hill . general peter a dannenberg took command of the russian army , and together with the uncommitted 9,000 men from the initial attacks , launched an assault on the british positions on home hill , held by the second division . the guards brigade and the fourth division were already marching to support the second division , but the british troops holding the barrier withdrew , before it was re-taken by men from the 21st , 63rd regiments and the rifle brigade . this position remained in british hands for the rest of the battle , despite determined attempts to take it back . the russians launched 7,000 men against the sandbag battery , which was defended by 2,000 british soldiers . so began a ferocious struggle which saw the battery change hands repeatedly . fourth division in action . when the british fourth division arrived under general george cathcart , they were finally able to go on the offensive . they launched a renewed attack against the russians and on their flanks . the courage of cathcart and his men had the unexpected effect of encouraging other british units to charge the russians . however , the flanking troops were caught in the rear by an unexpected russian counter-attack and cathcart was shot from his horse and killed , leaving his troops disorganized and the attack was broken up . this gave the russian army an opportunity to gain a crest on the ridge . however , as the russian troops were coming up , they were attacked and driven off by newly arrived soldiers from the french camps . the french , with marvelous rapidity , brought up a division from five miles away and poured reinforcements into the entire line , reducing the russians ' advantage in numbers . . defence of home hill by the british and french forces . at this point in the battle the russians launched another assault on the second division 's positions on home hill , but the timely arrival of the french army under pierre bosquet and further reinforcements from the british army repelled the russian attacks . the russians had now committed all of their troops and had no fresh reserves with which to act . two british 18-pounder guns along with field artillery bombarded the 100-gun strong russian positions on shell hill in counter-battery fire . with their batteries on shell hill taking withering fire from the british guns , their attacks rebuffed at all points , and lacking fresh infantry , the russians began to withdraw . the allies made no attempt to pursue them . following the battle , the allied regiments stood down and returned to their siege positions . aftermath . despite being severely outnumbered , the allied troops held their ground , becoming a marvel of each regiment 's tradition and tenacity . the amount of fog during the battle led to many of the troops on both sides being cut off , in battalion-sized groups or less . thus , the battle became known as '' the soldier 's battle '' . the russian attack , although unsuccessful , had denied the allies any attempt at gaining a quick victory in the siege of sevastopol and condemned the allied armies to two terrible winters on the heights . following this battle , the russians made no further large-scale attempts to defeat the allies in the field . alexander kinglake obtained the official casualty returns for the battle . by his account allied casualties were : 2,573 british , of whom 635 were killed , and 1,800 french , of whom 175 were killed . russia lost 3,286 killed within a total ( including men taken prisoner ) of 11,959 casualties . kinglake vol 5 , '' battle of inkerman '' , page 458 : '' from the general engagement of the 5th november , including the fight on mount inkerman , there resulted , it seems , to the russians a loss of 9,845 in killed , wounded , and prisoners of which 3,286 killed ; to the english a loss of 2,573 , of whom 635 were killed.official returns '' . . legacy . the battle popularised the use of the name inkerman in placenames in victorian england , including inkerman road in kentish town , london ; inkerman road , st albans , and inkerman way in knaphill . there is an inkerman street in st kilda , victoria , australia , in between balaclava rd and alma rd . there is also an inkerman , new brunswick named after the battle . see also . john prettyjohns . references . further reading . orlando figes ( 2010 ) the crimean war : a history . new york : picador publishing , 2010 kinglake , a . w . ( 1863 ) invasion of the crimea . 8 vols . edinburgh : blackwood , 1863–1887 . external links . the battle of inkerman at british battles the battle of inkerman at military history report in the times of 1 feb 1875 report in the times of 4 feb 1875