Car bomb

as a delivery system . image : iraq carbomb.jpg thumb car bomb in iraq , made up of a number of artillery shells concealed in the back of a pickup truck . car bombs are effective weapons as they are an easy way to transport a large amount of explosives to the intended target . a car bomb also produces copious shrapnel , or flying debris , and secondary damage to bystanders and buildings . in recent years , car bombs have become widely used by suicide bombers . . countermeasures . defending against a car bomb involves keeping vehicles at a distance from vulnerable targets by using roadblocks and checkpoints , jersey barriers , concrete blocks or bollards , metalith , or by hardening buildings to withstand an explosion . the entrance to downing street in london has been closed since 1991 in reaction to the provisional irish republican army ( pira ) campaign , preventing the general public from getting near number 10 . where major public roads pass near buildings , road closures may be the only option ( thus , for instance , in washington , d.c . the portion of pennsylvania avenue immediately in front of the white house is closed to traffic ) . historically these tactics have encouraged potential bombers to target soft target , such as markets . see davis . . suicide usage . in the syrian civil war , and iraq , the car bomb concept was modified so that it could be driven and detonated by a driver , but armoured to withstand incoming fire . the vehicle would be driven to its target area , in a similar fashion to a kamikaze plane of ww2 . these were known by the acronym svbied ( from suicide vehicle borne improvised explosive device ) or vbieds . this saw generally civilian cars with armour plating added , that would protect the car for as long as possible , so that it could reach its intended target . cars were sometimes driven into enemy troop areas , or into incoming enemy columns . most often , the svieds were used by isil against government forces , but also used by syrian rebels ( fsa and allied militias , especially the al-nusra front ) against government troops . globalsecurity.org ied vehicle the vehicles have become more sophisticated , with armour plating on the vehicle , protected vision slits , armour plating over the wheels so they would withstand being shot at , and also in some cases , additional metal grating over the front of the vehicle designed to activate rocket propelled grenades before hitting the actual surface of the vehicle . trends institution '' daeshis-armored-vehicle-borne ied '' in some cases trucks were also used , as well as cars . they were sometimes used to start an assault . generally the vehicles had a large space that would contain very heavy explosives . in some cases , animal drawn carts with improvised explosive devices have been used , generally either mules or horses . tactically , a single vehicle may be used , or an initial '' breakthrough '' vehicle , then followed by another vehicle . global security.org ied vehicle while many car bombs are disguised as ordinary vehicles , p.166 some that are used against military forces have improvised vehicle armour attached to prevent the driver from being shot when attacking a fortified outpost . . history . car bombs are preceded by the 16th century hellburners , explosive-laden ships which were used to deadly effect by the besieged dutch forces in antwerp against the besieging spanish . though using a less refined technology , the basic principle of the hellburner is similar to that of the car bomb . the first reported suicide car bombing ( and possibly the first suicide bombing ) was the bath school disaster of 1927 , where 45 people , including the bomber , were killed and half of a school was blown up . mass-casualty car bombing , and especially suicide car bombing , is currently a predominantly middle east phenomenon . the tactic was first introduced to the region by the zionism paramilitary organization lehi , who used it extensively against palestinian and british civilian and military targets ; it was subsequently taken up by palestinian militants as well . davis , chapter 4 , '' oranges for jaffa '' . the tactic was used in the lebanese civil war by the shia militia group hezbollah . a notable suicide car bombing was the 1983 beirut barracks bombing , when two simultaneous attacks killed 241 u.s . marines and 58 french military personnel . the perpetrator of these attacks has never been positively confirmed . in the lebanese civil war , an estimated 3,641 car bombs were detonated . while not an adaptation of a people-carrying vehicle , the ww2 german goliath remote control mine , shares many parallels with a vehicle-based ied . it approached a target ( often a tank or another armoured vehicle ) at some speed , and then exploded , destroying itself and the target . it was armoured so that it could not be destroyed en route . however , it was not driven by a person , instead operated by remote control from a safe distance . it was effectively an armoured suicide drone . as a booby trap . operation . car bombs and detonators function in a diverse manner of ways and there are numerous variables in the operation and placement of the bomb within the vehicle . earlier and less advanced car bombs were often wired to the car 's ignition system , but this practice is now considered more laborious and less effective than other more recent methods , as it required a greater amount of work for a system that could often be quite easily defused . while it is more common nowadays for car bombs to be fixed magnetism to the underside of the car , underneath the passenger or driver 's seat , or inside of the mudguard , detonators triggered by the opening of the vehicle door or by pressure applied to the brakes or accelerating pedals are also used . bombs operating by the former method of fixation to the underside of the car more often than not make use of a device called a tilt fuse . a small tube made of glass or plastic , the tilt fuse is not dissimilar to a mercury switch or medical tablet tube . one end of the fuse will be filled with mercury , while the other open end is wired with the ends of an open circuit to an electrical firing system . naturally , when the tilt fuse moves or is jerked , the supply of mercury will flow to the top of the tube and close the circuit . thus , as the vehicle goes through the regular bumping and dipping that comes with driving over a terrain , the circuit is completed and the bomb or explosive is allowed to function . as a safety mechanism to protect the bomber , the placer of the bomb may rig a timer incorporated with the circuit to activate the circuit only after a certain time period , therefore ensuring the bomber will not accidentally activate the bomb before he or she is able to get clear of the blast radius . . history . prior to the 20th century , bombs planted in horse carts had been used in assassination plots , notably in the unsuccessful '' machine infernale '' attempt to kill napoleon on 24 december 1800 . the first car bomb may have been the one used for the assassination attempt on ottoman sultan abdul hamid ii in 1905 in istanbul by armenian separatists , in the command of papken siuni belonging to the armenian revolutionary federation . car bombing was a significant part of the provisional irish republican army ( pira ) campaign during the troubles in northern ireland . dáithí ó conaill is credited with introducing the car bomb to northern ireland . dáithí ó conaill cite note-2 car bombs were also used by ulster loyalist groups ( for example , by the uvf during the dublin and monaghan bombings ) . pira chief of staff seán mac stíofáin defines the car bomb as both a tactical and a strategic guerrilla weapon . strategically , it disrupts the ability of the enemy government to administer the country , and hits simultaneously at the core of its economic structure by means of massive destruction . from a tactical point of view , it ties down a large number of security forces and troops around the main urban areas of the region in conflict . . examples . 1920 : the wall street bombing — suspected that italian anarchist mario buda ( a member of the '' galleanists '' ) parked a horse-drawn wagon filled with explosives and shrapnel in the financial district of new york city . the blast killed 38 and wounded 143 . 1927 : the bath school disaster — andrew kehoe used a detonator to ignite dynamite and hundreds of pounds of pyrotol which he had secretly planted inside a school . as rescuers started gathering at the school , kehoe drove up , stopped , and detonated a bomb inside his shrapnel-filled vehicle , killing himself and the school superintendent , and killing and injuring several others . in total , kehoe killed 44 people and injured 58 making the bath school bombing the deadliest act of mass murder in a school in u.s . history . it is possibly the first suicide attack in history . militant group lehi were the first group to use car bombs in the mandatory palestine . the viet cong guerrillas used them at the end of the first indochina war and throughout the vietnam war . the oas used them at the end of the french rule in algeria . the sicilian mafia used them to assassinate independent magistrates up to the early 1990s . the ira used them frequently during its campaign during the troubles in northern ireland and england . the omagh bombing by the real ira , an ira splinter group , caused the most casualties in the troubles from a single car bomb . former chile general carlos prats was killed by a car bomb on september 30 , 1974 , along with his wife . loyalist organisations in northern ireland such as the ulster volunteer force ( uvf ) and ulster defence association used car bombs against civilians in both northern ireland and the republic of ireland . the uvf bombs in dublin and monaghan car bomb kills northern ireland lawyer bbc news , 15 march 1999 . caused the most casualties in a single day during the troubles . the basque separatist group euskadi ta askatasuna ( eta ) carried out at least 80 massive car bomb attacks in spain during the last decade before putting its activities on hold in 2011 . freelance terrorist carlos the jackal claimed responsibility for three car bomb attacks on french newspapers accused of pro-israeli bias during the 1970s . cleveland mobster danny greene frequently used car bombs against his enemies , beginning in 1968 . afterwards , they also began to be used against greene and his associates . the use of car bombs in cleveland peaked in 1976 , when 36 bombs exploded in the city , most of them car bombs , causing it to be nicknamed '' bomb city . '' several people , including innocent bystanders , were killed or wounded . greene himself was finally killed in a car bomb explosion on october 6 , 1977 . the german red army faction occasionally used car bombs , such as in an unsuccessful attempt to attack a nato school for officers in 1984 . constable angela taylor died on her way to collect lunch , sole fatality of the russell street bombing in melbourne , australia on 27 march 1986 . 22 others were injured . on 23 november 1986 two members of the armenian revolutionary federation carried out the melbourne turkish consulate bombing using a car bomb , which resulted in the death of one of the attackers . during the soviet–afghan war , at a variety of training camps in the tribal areas of pakistan , davis , ch . 13 , '' car-bomb university '' the pakistani isi , with the aid of the cia , trained mujahideen in the preparation of car bombs . car bombs became a regular occurrence during the war , the afghan civil conflicts which followed , and then during the u.s . invasion of afghanistan . agents of the chilean intelligence agency dina were convicted of using car bombs to assassinate orlando letelier and carlos prats , who were exiled opponents of dictator augusto pinochet . letelier was killed in sheridan circle , in the heart of embassy row in washington , dc . in the 1980s , the colombian drug lord pablo escobar used vehicle bombs extensively against government forces and population centers in colombia and latin america . the most notable car bombing attack was the das building bombing , which killed 63 and injured about 1,000 . from 1979 to early 1983 , under the guise of the '' front for the liberation of lebanon from foreigners '' idf commanders rafael eitan , avigdor ben-gal and meir dagan launched a campaign of bombings , including car , bicycle , and even donkey bombs . initially conducted as a response to the killing of israeli civilians at nahariya . largely indiscriminate in its targeting of those associated with the plo in south , lebanon , the fllf attacks killed hundreds of palestinians and lebanese , mainly in tyre , sidon and the surrounding plo run refugee camps . after 1981 , as part of ariel sharon 's policy of goading the plo into committing more acts of terror , justifying a military response , fllf attacks escalated in intensity and scope , spreading to beirut and northern lebanon by september . the fllf even took credit for fictional attacks on the idf to maintain its cover as a lebanese organisation . its most prominent attack on october 1 1981 in west beirut killed at least 50 and injured over 250 people . seven other similar bombs were found and defused before they could explode . suicide car bombs were a regular feature against israel in the 1982 lebanon war which lasted from 1982 until israel 's withdrawal in 2000 . the bombing campaign was waged by several groups , most prominently hezbollah . on 26 february 1993 , islamist terrorists led by ramzi yousef detonated a ryder truck filled with explosives in the parking garage of the world trade center in new york city . yousef 's plan had been to cause one of the towers to collapse into the other , destroying both and killing thousands of people . although this was not achieved , six people were killed , 1,402 others injured , and extensive damage was caused . on april 18 , 1993 a tanker containing 500 kilograms of explosives exploded near the mosque in vitez , destroying the offices of the bosnian war presidency , killing at least six people and injuring 50 others . the icty accepted that this action was a piece of pure terrorism committed by elements within the croat forces , as an attack on the bosniak population of stari vitez - vitez old town . hvo members tied a bosniak man , civilian from a concentration camp , & nbsp ; to the steering wheel and set the truck in motion towards the old town . the quebec biker war that lasted from 1994 to 2002 involved the use of car bombings , including one that killed an 11-year-old boy . on 19 april 1995 , timothy mcveigh detonated a ryder box truck filled with an explosive mixture of anfo ( anfo ) in front of the alfred p . murrah federal building in oklahoma city during the oklahoma city bombing , killing 168 people , including 19 children who were in the daycare . on june 25 , 1996 , a truck bomb khobar towers bombing in saudi arabia , killing 19 united states air force ( usaf ) personnel and injuring 372 persons of all nationalities . in the late 1990s and early 2000s , vehicular explosives were used by chechen nationalists against targets in russia . on 20 april 1999 , eric harris and dylan klebold planned to use two car bombs as the last act of the columbine high school massacre , apparently to murder first responders . both failed to explode . southeast asia-based militant islamist group jemaah islamiyah utilized car bombs in their campaigns during the early 2000s , the most prominent being the 2002 bali bombings , which killed 202 people . former lebanon prime minister rafic hariri was assassinated by a car bomb during valentine 's day of 2005 . 21 others were also killed . on 30 june 2007 , a jeep cherokee loaded with propane tanks crashed into the entrance of glasgow international airport . the vehicle caught fire , but failed to detonate . as a result , there were no injuries from the attack itself apart from the driver , who died of his injuries several weeks later , and one passenger who was severely burned , although several bystanders were injured in restraining the two . the attackers appear to have been muslims unaffiliated with any organization who were disgruntled about the war on terror . thirty-six hours earlier , two bombs had also been found in a vehicle in london , although the police reported that the bombs were incomplete and could not have exploded . the tamil tigers of sri lanka frequently made use of car bombs during that country 's civil war in a campaign which lasted from 1976 until the group 's defeat in 2009 . a car bomb which had misfired was discovered in times square , new york city on may 1 , 2010 . the bomb had been planted by faisal shahzad . evidence suggests that the bombing was planned by the pakistani taliban . on 11 december 2010 , ( 2010 stockholm bombings ) - a car bomb exploded in central stockholm in sweden , slightly injuring two bystanders . twelve minutes later , an iraqi-born swedish citizen accidentally detonated six pipe bombs he was carrying , but only one exploded . the bomber was killed but there were no other casualties . it is believed that the attacks were the work of homegrown terrorists who were protesting sweden 's involvement in the war in afghanistan and the publication in sweden of cartoons depicting muhammad . on 22 july 2011 , in the norway massacre , far-right extremist anders behring breivik detonated a car bomb within the regjeringskvartalet of oslo , norway , killing 8 people . during june 2015 , in ramadi , iraq , a vehicle-borne ied resulted in the collapse of an 8 story tall building during fighting between the iraqi army and daesh . the daesh truck bomb was fired upon by a rocket-propelled grenade which resulted in the explosion . on 21 december 2016 , a minibus filled with gas bottles intentionally crashed into the australian christian lobby building entrance . no injuries were incurred , but the building was badly damaged . on 16 october 2017 , maltese journalist and blogger daphne caruana galizia died in a car bomb attack . on 27 january 2018 , an ambulance filled with explosives was blown up near sidarat square in kabul , afghanistan . on 25 december 2020 , a 2020 nashville bombing in downtown nashville , tennessee , injuring at least 8 and killing the perpetrator , anthony quinn warner . groups that use car bombs . hezbollah member imad mughniyah was assassinated by a car bomb in syria in 2008 , allegedly by mossad . although it has never been officially acknowledged , the american cia has occasionally been accused of being behind car bombings . one such attack was the failed assassination attempt on grand ayatollah mohammad hussein fadlallah in the 1985 beirut car bombing . although there has been widespread speculation of cia involvement , this has never been proven conclusively . various palestinian militant groups , against both military and civilian israeli targets . dissident republicans in northern ireland used car bombs in the last two decades , the deadliest attack being the omagh bombing of 1998 . al-qaeda , in attacks around the world since the 1990s , most notably the 1998 united states embassy bombings . militants and criminals in india occasionally utilize car bombs in attacks . this includes muslim , sikh , kashmiri and naxalite militants , as well as rival politicians within the government and organized crime . a notable recent attack was the 25 august 2003 mumbai bombings , in which two car bombs killed 54 people . the attack was claimed by the pakistani-backed kashmiri separatist group lashkar-e-taiba . since the beginning of the u.s.-led war in afghanistan in 2001 , the taliban have often employed vehicular explosives against enemy targets . this has included not just cars and trucks but even bicycle bombs . image : car bomb in iraq.jpg thumb a 2005 car bombing in iraq , in which a second car bomb was detonated while us forces were investigating the scene of an earlier such blast , resulting in 18 casualties . the iraqi insurgency . an estimated 578 car bombs were detonated in iraq between june 2003 and june 2006 . car bombs continue to be commonly used . the islamic state of iraq and the levant , which has employed armored explosive-laden crossovers , full-sized pickup trucks , motorbikes and sport utility vehicles as suicidal tactical units to breach enemy defensive fronts in syria and iraq . the use of armored tractors and haul trucks was also recorded over the course of the war . the pakistani taliban have occasionally used car bombs in their ongoing conflict with the government of pakistan . the juárez cartel 's armed wing , la línea , used a car bomb to attack police officers in ciudad juárez , mexico on 15 july 2010 . the sinaloa cartel and the gulf cartel were blamed for using car bombs in nuevo laredo , mexico on 24 april 2011 to '' heat up '' the turf of los zetas . . see also . deaths by car bomb improvised explosive device ( ied ) insurgency list of mass car bombings kamikaze . notes . references . mike davis , buda 's wagon : a brief history of the car bomb ( verso : new york , 2007 ) . external links . video of a detected car bomb ( vbied ) going off a history of the car bomb ( asia times ) '' explosive reading '' , review by daniel swift for the financial times car bomb - manyriverfilms ' award-winning documentary history of the car bomb