White Christmas (weather)

definition . the criteria for a '' white christmas '' varies . in most countries , it simply means that the ground is covered by snow at christmas , but some countries have more strict definitions . in the united states , the official definition of a white christmas is that there has to be a snow depth of at least on the ground on december 25 in the contiguous united states , and in canada the official definition is that there has to be more than on the ground on christmas day . in the united kingdom , although for many a white christmas simply means a complete covering of snow on christmas day , the official definition by the british met office and british bookmakers is for snow to be observed falling , however little ( even if it melts before it reaches the ground ) , in the 24 hours of 25 december . consequently , according to the met office and british bookmakers , even of snow on the ground at christmas , because of a heavy snow fall a few days before , will not constitute a white christmas , but a few snowflakes mixed with rain will , even if they never reach the ground . in the united kingdom the most likely place to see snowfall on a christmas day is in north and north eastern scotland , in aberdeen , aberdeenshire or the highlands . although the term white christmas usually refers to snow , if a significant hail accumulation occurs in an area on christmas day , as happened in parts of melbourne on 25 december 2011 , this can also be described as a white christmas , due to the resulting white appearance of the landscape resembling snow cover . . north america . canada . in most parts of canada it is likely to have a white christmas in most years , except for the coast and southern interior valleys of british columbia , southern alberta , southern ontario , and parts of atlantic canada – in those places christmas without snow is not uncommon in warmer years , with the british columbia coast the least likely place to have a white christmas . the definition of a white christmas in canada is of snow-cover or more on christmas morning at 7 am . environment canada started to analyze data from 1955 to 2017 for a total of 63 years , it shows the chance of a white christmas for several canadian cities . the year 2006 saw some of the warmest weather on record , with such places as quebec city experiencing their first green christmas in recorded history . in 2008 , canada experienced the first nationwide white christmas in 37 years , as a series of pre-christmas storms hit the nation , including the normally rainy bc pacific coast . in 2015 , the weather was mild in the east , with record-setting warm temperatures in toronto and southern ontario which made 2015 a green christmas while the west saw cold and snowy weather . it 's going to be a green christmas for many canadians , cbc news , december 24 , 2015 . united states . in the united states , there is often—but not always—snow on the ground at christmas in the northern states , except in the pacific northwest , with alaska the most likely to see snow on the ground at christmas . in the contiguous united states , the highest probabilities are in the upper midwest and parts of northern new england , along with higher elevations of the rockies . some of the least likely white christmases that have happened include the 2004 christmas eve snowstorm , which brought the first white christmas in 50 years to new orleans . the 2004 storm also brought the first measurable snow of any kind since 1895 to brownsville , texas , and its twin city of matamoros , mexico . the florida winter storm of 1989 also occurred immediately before christmas causing a white christmas for cities like pensacola and jacksonville . the same storm buried wilmington , north carolina and the rest of southeastern north carolina under of snow . in the united states the notion of a white christmas is often associated in the american popular consciousness with a christmas celebration that includes traditional observances in the company of friends and family . '' white christmas '' is an irving berlin song reminiscing about an old-fashioned christmas setting . according to research by the cdiac , the united states during the second half of the 20th century experienced declining frequencies of white christmases , especially in the northeastern region . the national climatic data center based the probability of a white christmas of snow on the ground ) at selected cities upon the 1981–2010 numbers from stations with at least 25 years of data . . tables for north america . . poland . the last white christmas in kraków was in 2010 . rzeszów had a white christmas in 2016 , the first since 2011 . super express ( 17 december 2014 ) , boże narodzenie 2014 . pogoda na święta . czekają nas białe święta ? sprawdź , gdzie spadnie śnieg . zpr media s.a . : pogodynka . . croatia . in recent decades , white christmas in zagreb - defined as the presence of snow cover on the ground on christmas morning - has been observed in 1996 , 1998 , 1999 , 2001 and - most recently , as of 2018 - in 2007 . the probability of white christmas in zagreb has been estimated at 25 % . in continental croatia , the estimated probability of white christmas is highest in gorski kotar and lika ( 50-70 % ) , followed by northwestern croatia ( 40-60 % ) and slavonia ( 20-40 % ) . climate projections suggest white christmases in croatia might become rarer in the future . . other parts of europe . in europe , snow at christmas is common in norway , sweden , finland , the baltic states , russia , ukraine , belarus , and northeastern poland . in general , due to the influence of the warm gulf stream on european climate , chances of a white christmas are lower farther west . for example , in southern france a white christmas is rare , while in bucharest , romania , which is at a similar latitude , it is much more likely . northern italy and the mountain regions of central-south italy may also have a white christmas . in cities such as turin , milan or bologna a christmas with falling snow or snow on the ground is not a rarity . white christmases are also common in the carpathian mountains , as well as the alps . southern hemisphere . because christmas occurs during the summer in the southern hemisphere , white christmases are especially rare events there , apart from antarctica , which is generally uninhabited . a white christmas elsewhere in the southern hemisphere is approximately equivalent to having snow in the northern hemisphere on 25 june . some places like ushuaia and stanley , falkland islands have received measurable snowfall on christmas day on numerous occasions . in 2006 , a snowstorm hit the snowy mountains in new south wales and victoria , arriving on christmas morning and bringing nearly of snow in higher areas . in new zealand 's southern alps / kā tiritiri o te moana , snow can fall any day of the year , and a white christmas is possible . the same situation can be seen in the andes at elevations above , with some locations on the bolivian altiplano , such as el alto , having the theoretical possibility of a white christmas . references . external links . are you dreaming of a white christmas ?