Eugenics Board of North Carolina

structure . the board was made up of five members : the commissioner of public welfare of north carolina . the secretary of the state board of health of north carolina . the chief medical officer of '' an institute for the feebleminded or insane '' of the state of north carolina not located in raleigh . the chief medical officer of the state hospital at raleigh . the attorney general of the state of north carolina . history of the board . 1919 . the state of north carolina first enacted sterilization legislation in 1919 . the 1919 law was the first foray for north carolina into eugenics ; this law , entitled '' an act to benefit the moral , mental , or physical conditions of inmates of penal and charitable institutions '' was quite brief , encompassing only 4 sections . provision was made for creation of a board of consultation , made up of a member of the medical staff of any of the penal or charitable state institutions , and a representative of the state board of health , to oversee sterilization that was to be undertaken when '' in the judgement of the board hereby created , said operation would be for the improvement of the mental , moral or physical conditions of any inmate of any of the said institutions '' . the board of consultation would have reported to both the governor and the secretary of the state board of health . no sterilizations were performed under the provisions of this law , though its structure was to guide following legislation . . 1929 . in 1929 , two years after the landmark buck v . bell in which sterilization was ruled permissible under the u.s . constitution , north carolina passed an updated law that formally laid down rules for the sterilization of citizens . this law , entitled '' an act to provide for the sterilization of the mentally defective and feeble-minded inmates of charitable and penal institutions of the state of north carolina '' , was similar to the law which preceded it , although this new act contained several new provisions . in contrast to the 1919 law , which had mandated sterilization for the '' improvement of the mental , moral or physical condition of any inmate '' , the new law added a new and far-reaching condition : '' or for the public good . '' this condition , expanding beyond the individual to greater considerations of society , would be built on in the ensuing years . the 1929 law also expanded the review process to four reviewers , namely : the commissioner of charities and public welfare of north carolina , the secretary of the state board of health of north carolina , and the chief medical officers of any two institutions for the '' feeble-minded or insane '' for the state of north carolina . lastly , the new law also explicitly stated that sterilization , where performed under the act 's guidelines , would be lawful and that any persons who requested , authorized or directed proceedings would not be held criminally or civilly liable for actions taken . under the 1929 law , 49 recorded cases took place in which sterilization was performed . . 1933-1971 . in 1933 , the north carolina state supreme court heard brewer v . valk , an appeal from forsyth county superior court , in which the supreme court upheld that the 1929 law violated both the u.s . constitution 's 14th amendment and article 1 , section 17 of the 1868 north carolina state constitution . the supreme court noted that property rights required due process , specifically a mechanism by which notice of action could be given , and hearing rights established so that somebody subject to the sterilization law had the opportunity to appeal their case . under both the u.s . constitution and the n.c . state constitution in place at the time , the supreme court ruled that the 1929 law was unconstitutional as no such provisions existed in the law as written . the north carolina general assembly went on in the wake of brewer v . valk to enact house bill 1013 , removing the constitutional objections to the law , thereby forming the eugenics board and creating the framework which would remain in force for over thirty years . the board was granted authority over all sterilization proceedings undertaken in the state , which had previously been devolved to various governing bodies or heads of penal and charitable institutions supported in whole or in part by the state . a study from gregory n . price , william darity jr . , and rhonda v . sharpe argues that from 1958-1968 , sterilization in north carolina was specifically targeted towards black americans , with the intended effect of racial eugenics . price , gregory ; darity jr . , william ; sharpe , rhonda ( 2020-06-28 ) . '' did north carolina economically breed-out blacks during its historical eugenic sterilization campaign ? '' . american review of political economy . 15 ( 1 ) . doi:10.38024/arpe.pds.6.28.20 . issn 1551-1383 . sharpe , of the women 's institute for science , equity and race , argues that this is an example of the need to disaggregate data that might otherwise overlook the experiences of black women . suiter , mary . '' rhonda vonshay sharpe women in economics '' . www.stlouisfed.org . retrieved 2020-10-08 . 1971-1977 . in the 1970s the eugenics board was moved around from department to department , as sterilization operations declined in the state . in 1971 , an act of the legislature transferred the ebnc to the then newly created department of human resources ( dhr ) , and the secretary of that department was given managerial and executive authority over the board . under a 1973 law , the eugenics board was transformed into the eugenics commission . members of the commission were appointed by the governor , and included the director of the division of social and rehabilitative services of the dhr , the director of health services , the chief medical officer of a state institution for the feeble-minded or insane , the chief medical officer of the dhr in the area of mental health services , and the state attorney general . in 1974 the legislature transferred to the judicial system the responsibility for any proceedings . 1976 brought a new challenge to the law with the case of in re sterilization of joseph lee moore in which an appeal was heard by the north carolina supreme court . the petitioner 's case was that the court had not appointed counsel at state expense to advise him of his rights prior to sterilization being performed . while the court noted that there was discretion within the law to approve a fee for the service of an expert , it was not constitutionally required . the court went on to declare that the involuntary sterilization of citizens for the public good was a legitimate use of the police power of the state , further noting that '' the people of north carolina have a right to prevent the procreation of children who will become a burden on the state . '' the ruling upholding the constitutionality was notable in both its relatively late date ( many other states had ceased performing sterilization operations shortly after wwii ) and its language justifying state intervention on the grounds of children being a potential burden to the public . the eugenics commission was formally abolished by the legislature in 1977 . . 2000-present . in 2003 , the n.c . general assembly formally repealed the last involuntary sterilization law , replacing it with one that authorizes sterilization of individuals unable to give informed consent only in the case of medical necessity . the law explicitly ruled out sterilizations '' solely for the purpose of sterilization or for hygiene or convenience . '' . justification of eugenics policy . legal . at the time of the board 's formation there was a body of thought that viewed the practice of eugenics as both necessary for the public good and for the private citizen . following buck v . bell , the supreme court was often cited both domestically and internationally as a foundation for eugenics policies . in buck v . bell oliver wendell holmes wrote , in support of eugenics policy , that despite the supreme court rulings in support of eugenics as constitutionally permitted , even as late as 1950 some physicians in north carolina were still concerned about the legality of sterilization . efforts were made to reassure the medical community that the laws were both constitutionally sound and specifically exempting physicians from liability . . public good . framing eugenics as supporting the public good was fundamental to how the law was written . it was argued that both for the benefit of the private citizen , and for the costs to society of future possible childbirths , eugenics were a sound and moral way to proceed . this was stated in the board 's manual of policies and procedures , in which the practice was justified : sterilization has one effect only—it prevents parenthood . it is not a punishment ; it is a protection ; and therefore carries no stigma or humiliation . it in no way unsexes the party sterilized . sterilization is approved by the families and friends of the sterilized . it is approved by medical staffs , probation officers , and social workers generally wherever they have come in contact with patients who have been sterilized . it permits patients , who would otherwise be confined to institutions during the fertile period of life , to return to their homes and friends . the records show that many moron girls paroled from institutions after sterilization have married and are happy and succeeding fairly well . they could never have managed and cared for children , to say nothing of the possible inheritance and fate of such children . homes are kept together by sterilization of husband or wife in many mild cases of mental disease , thus removing the dread by the normal spouse of the procreation of a defective child and permitting normal marital companionship . there is no discovery vitally affecting the life , happiness and well being of the human race in the last quarter of a century about which intelligent people know less than they know about modern sterilization . the operation is simple ; it removes no organ or tissue of the body . it has no effect on the patient except to prevent parenthood . under conservative laws , sanely and equitably administered , these discoveries developed by the medical profession now offer to the mentally ill , feeble-minded , and epileptic the protection of sterilization . in the press , opinion articles were published arguing for a greater use of eugenics , in which many of the reasons above were cited as justification . even the winston-salem journal , which would be a significant force in illuminating north carolina 's past eugenics abuses in the modern era , was not immune . in 1948 the newspaper published an editorial entitled '' the case for sterilization - quantity vs . quality '' that went into great detail extolling the virtues of 'breeding ' for the general public good . proponents of eugenics did not restrict its use to the 'feeble-minded ' . in many cases , more ardent authors included the blind , deaf-mutes , and people suffering from diseases like heart disease or cancer in the general category of those who should be sterilized . the argument was twofold ; that parents likely to give birth to 'defective ' children should not allow it , and that healthy children borne to 'defective ' parents would be doomed to an 'undesirable environment' . wallace kuralt , mecklenburg county 's welfare director from 1945 to 1972 , was a leader in transitioning the work of state eugenics from looking only at medical conditions to considering poverty as a justification for state sterilization . under kuralt 's tenure , mecklenburg county became far and away the largest source of sterilizations in the state . he supported this throughout his life in his writings and interviews , where he made plain his conviction that sterilization was a force for good in fighting poverty . in a 1964 interview with the charlotte observer , kuralt said : when we stop to reflect upon the thousands of physical , mental and social misfits in our midst , the thousands of families which are too large for the family to support , the one-tenth of our children born to an unmarried mother , the hoard of children rejected by parents , is there any doubt that health , welfare and education agencies need to redouble their efforts to prevent these conditions which are so costly to society ? among public and private groups that published articles advocating for eugenics , the human betterment league was a significant advocate for the procedure within north carolina . this organization , founded by procter & gamble heir clarence gamble provided experts , written material and monetary support to the eugenics movement . many pamphlets and publications were created by the league advocating the group 's position which were then distributed throughout the state . one pamphlet entitled 'you would n't expect . ' laid out a series of rhetorical questions to argue the point that those considered 'defective ' were unable to be good parents . . legacy . number of operations . while it is not known exactly how many people were sterilized during the lifetime of the law , the task force established by governor beverly perdue estimated the total at around 7,500 . they provided a summary of the estimated number of operations broken down by time period . this does not include sterilizations that may have occurred at a local level by doctors and hospitals . . external links . nc justice for sterilization victims foundation website . state library 's project on eugenics in north carolina the winston salem journal : against their will - north carolina 's sterilization program