Gabriel Naudé

biography . naudé was born in paris in early 1600 to a family of modest means . his father was a lowly official and his mother was a young illiterate woman . jack clarke , gabriel naudé ( hamden , connecticut : archon books , 1970 ) , 3 . he was described by his teachers as tenacious and passionate about his education . naudé entered college at a young age where he studied philosophy and grammar . clarke , 3 . later he studied medicine at paris and padua ( where he attended cesare cremonini 's lessons ) , and became physician to louis xiii . at the age of twenty , naudé published his first book le marfore ou discours contre les lisbelles . clarke , 4 . the work would bring him to the attention of henri de mesme , président à mortier of the paris parlement . mesme offered naudé the job of librarian to his personal collection . mesmes had a large library for the period ( about 8,000 volumes ) and it was open to scholars who had the appropriate references . clarke , 8 . naudé 's service in mesme 's library would give him experience which he would use later to write the book advice on establishing a library . naudé wrote advice for mesme as a guide for building and maintaining his library . in 1629 he became librarian to cardinal guidi di bagno at rome , and on bagni 's death in 1641 librarian to cardinal francesco barberini . at the desire of cardinal richelieu he began a controversy with the benedictines , denying jean gerson 's authorship of de imitatione christi . richelieu intended to make naudé his librarian , and on his death naudé accepted a similar offer from cardinal mazarin . for the next ten years he devoted himself to bringing together from all parts of europe the assemblage of books known as the bibliothèque mazarine . mazarin had brought with him to paris a collection numbering over 5,000 volumes . world encyclopedia of library and information services , 3rd ed . , s.v . '' gabriel naude '' . like naudé , he believed in an open library to be used by the public for the public good . in 1642 he purchased a building to house his library and he instructed naudé to build up the finest collection possible . the fastest way was to absorb entire libraries into the collection , advice that naudé included in his book . naudé plundered second hand book sellers , and mazarin instructed his ambassadors , government officials and generals to collect books for him . naudé was able to travel europe , and during one trip that lasted several months he collected over 14,000 volumes . clarke , 76 . by 1648 the library had built up to an estimated at 40,000 volumes . it was open on a regular basis and had built up a sizable number ( almost 100 ) of regular patrons , and several staff members to keep it functioning properly . it became the first in france to be open for all , without references . mazarin 's library was sold by the parlement of paris during the troubles of the fronde , and queen christina invited naudé to stockholm . he was not happy in sweden , and on mazarin 's appeal that he should re-form his scattered library naudé returned at once . but his health was broken , and he died on the journey in abbeville on 10 july 1653 . the friend of gui patin , of pierre gassendi and all the liberal thinkers of his time , naudé was no mere bookworm ; his books show traces of the critical spirit which made him a worthy colleague of the humorists and scholars who prepared the way for the better known writers of the siècle de louis xiv . career as a librarian . naudé , in his career as a librarian , “ opposed censorship , and encouraged library owners to allow others to use their books , a practice he considered a great honor for the owner – an honor equal to that of having the opportunity to build a fine library . '' naudé found it favorable to collect original format of books and to keep the volumes collected intact . he was a true believer of considering the needs of those that would access them and felt strong consideration to be sought from the experts in each particular field . he was adamant about collecting in all languages , about all religions , subject matters , and literature . during his career in librarianship , naudé helped instruct collectors and libraries in the selection and acquisition of their titles and how to create catalogs for their libraries . he was a major proponent of scouring secondhand bookshops and print shops for valuable and hard to find literary works . “ when naudé has been in town , the booksellers ' shops seem devastated as by a whirlwind . having bought up in every last one of them all the books , whether in manuscript or in print , dealing in any language whatever with any subject or division of learning no matter what , he has left the stores stripped and bare . ” naudé also had interesting ideas on the locale where a library should be located . “ while centrally located within the community it serves , a library should be at some distance from the noisiest streets . it should , if possible , be situated between some spacious court and a pleasant garden , from which it may enjoy good light , a wide and agreeable prospect , and pure air , unpolluted by marshes , sinks , or dunghills ; the whole arrangement so well planned and ordered that it is compelled to share nothing unpleasant or obviously inconvenient . ” probably the most famous library that naudé helped shape , and in which he served as librarian , was the bibliothèque mazarine in paris , the library of cardinal mazarin . naudé spent ten years of his life improving and shaping the bibliothéque . it became the first public library in france because of naudé ’ s insistence and was open to the public as early as 1644 . . artistic portrayals . naudé is the subject of peter briscoe 's novel , the best read man in france . . works . including works edited by him , a list of ninety-two pieces is given in the naudaeana . the principal ones are : le marfore , ou discours contre les libelles ( paris , 1620 ) , very rare , reprinted 1868 ; instruction à la france sur la vérité de l'histoire des frères de la roze-croix ( 1623 , 1624 ) , displaying their impostures ; apologie pour tous les grands personages faussement soupçonnez de magie ( 1625 , 1653 , 1669 , 1712 ) , pythagoras , socrates , thomas aquinas jerome cardan and solomon are among those defended ; advis pour dresser une bibliothèque ( 1627 , 1644 , 1676 ; translated by john evelyn , 1661 ) , full of sound and liberal views on librarianship and considered as a founding stone of library science ; addition à l'histoire de louys xi ( 1630 ) , this includes an account of the origin of printing ; bibliographia politica ( venice , 1633 , etc . ; in french , 1642 ) ; de studio liberali syntagma ( 1632 , 1654 ) , a practical treatise found in most collections of directions for studies ; de studio militari syntagma ( 1637 ) , esteemed in its day ; considérations politiques sur les coups d'état . a disciple of machiavelli , he considered that politics must be rendered '' autonomous from morality , sovereign in relation to religion '' french : « abolir toute idée de droits autres que ceux du chef » et rendre « la politique autonome par rapport à la morale , souveraine par rapport à la religion » . a bibliotheca pontificia was completed and seen into print by louis jacob . wikisource : catholic encyclopedia ( 1913 ) /ludovicus a s . carolo . advice on establishing a library . advice , written as a set of instructions for a private collector and was based on naudé 's own experience and research . in the introduction of his book , naudé wrote that he is not an expert in the field of librarianship but he presented what he believed to be the most important ideas . he based some of the opinions in advice on his own experience in mesme 's library , and wrote out for mesme the accepted practices and principles of librarians of the time . chapters covered topics such as number of books , selecting the books , procuring the books , etc . naudé 's first chapter poses the question , '' why establish a library ? '' he answers the question with a simple message ; there is no greater honor than building a great library and sharing it with the public . naudé believes libraries should model themselves after the best libraries of the world . the first task is to create a plan . before a person can erect a library , he must educate himself on the subject of collecting and organizing books . a person must also seek the guidance of those who have already built their own libraries or are in the process . he suggests studying and copying the catalogues of other libraries . naudé devotes an entire chapter to book selection , remarked upon throughout . the first authors who need to be purchased are those considered experts in their respective fields . no matter whether they are ancient or modern works , if a book is held in high regard by practitioners of a particular field then it should be present in any collection . in addition , any well known interpretations or commentaries that exist are a necessity . naudé suggested purchasing books in the original languages because meaning can often be lost in translation . he is strongly against censorship of any kind . naudé believes that every book has a reader regardless of the subject ; and that information should be free and available . readers could always find use of a book , even if it is to refute the ideas presented on its pages . certain books are popular at times but later forgotten ; he argued that it would be beneficial to a library if there were multiple copies of these books to accommodate the popular tastes of the times . in his chapter on book acquisition , naudé gave tips . the easiest way is to purchase another library in its entirety . naudé went on to praise second-hand book sellers who often provided good books at cheap prices . naudé himself browsed book-binding and printing shops for used paper , and had once discovered a rare manuscript that a book binder was using as scrap paper . naudé included a chapter in advice for arranging the books . in discussing arrangement he quoted cicero , '' it is order that gives light to memory . '' he gave instructions that he considered logical . his subject headings included : theology , philosophy , jurisprudence , medicine , history , mathematics and humanities . naudé would add other subject heading in later years but these categories best represented the known body of knowledge in the world . each section should be divided into subheadings and begin with the principal authors followed by the commentaries .