Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle

biography . fontenelle was born in rouen , france ( then the capital of normandy ) and died in paris just one month before his 100th birthday . his mother was the sister of great french dramatists pierre and thomas corneille . his father , françois le bovier de fontenelle , was a lawyer who worked in the provincial court of rouen and came from a family of lawyers from alençon . he trained in the law but gave up after one case , devoting his life to writing about philosophers and scientists , especially defending the cartesian tradition . in spite of the undoubted merit and value of his writings , both to the laity and the scientific community , there is no question of his being a primary contributor to the field . he was a commentator and explicator and occasionally a passionate , though generally good-humoured , controversialist . grégoire françois . le dernier défenseur des tourbillons : fontenelle . in : revue d'histoire des sciences et de leurs applications , tome 7 , n°3 , 1954 . pp . 220-246 . doi : 10.3406/rhs.1954.3438 he was educated at the college of the jesuits , the lycée pierre corneille ( although it did not adopt the name of his uncle ( pierre corneille ) until 1873 , about 200 years later ) . at the lycée he showed a preference for literature and distinguished himself . early work . he began as a poet , writing a poem in latin at the age of 13 and more than once competed for prizes of the académie française , but he never won anything . he visited paris from time to time and became friendly with the abbé de saint-pierre , the abbé vertot and the mathematician pierre varignon . he witnessed , in 1680 , the total failure of his tragedy aspar . fontenelle afterwards acknowledged the public verdict by burning his unfortunate drama . his libretto for pascal collasse 's thétis et pélée ( '' thetis and peleus '' ) , which premiered at the opéra de paris in january , 1689 , was received with great acclaim . his lettres galantes du chevalier d'her . , published anonymously in 1685 , was a collection of letters portraying worldly society of the time . it immediately made its mark . in 1686 his famous allegory of rome and geneva , slightly disguised as the rival princesses mreo and eenegu , in the relation de l'île de bornéo , gave proof of his daring in religious matters . but it was by his nouveaux dialogues des morts ( 1683 ) that fontenelle established a genuine claim to high literary rank ; and that claim was enhanced three years later by what has been summarised as the most influential work on the plurality of worlds in the period , entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes ( 1686 ) . he wrote extensively on the nature of the universe : behold a universe so immense that i am lost in it . i no longer know where i am . i am just nothing at all . our world is terrifying in its insignificance . later work . thumb fontenelle had made his home in rouen , but in 1687 he moved to paris ; and in the same year he published his histoire des oracles , a book which made a considerable stir in theological and philosophical circles . it consisted of two essays , the first of which was designed to prove that oracles were not given by the supernatural agency of demons , and the second that they did not cease with the birth of jesus . it excited the suspicion of the church , and a jesuit , by name jean-françois baltus , published a ponderous refutation of it ; but the peace-loving disposition of its author impelled him to leave his opponent unanswered . to the following year ( 1688 ) belongs his digression sur les anciens et les modernes , in which he took the modern side in the controversy then raging ; his doutes sur le système physique des causes occasionnelles ( against nicolas malebranche ) appeared shortly afterwards . he remained influential in his older years and when a then unknown jean-jacques rousseau met him in 1742 , when fontenelle was 85 , he passed on the advice he gave all young writers that came to him : '' you must courageously offer your brow to laurel wreaths and your nose to blows . '' a noted gourmand , he attributed his longevity to eating strawberries . at ninety-two , one observer wrote that he was as lively as a man of twenty-two . when , in his late nineties , he met the beautiful madame helvétius , he reportedly told her , '' ah madame , if only i were eighty again ! '' . member of the french academy . in 1691 he was received into the french academy in spite of the determined efforts of the partisans of the '' ancients '' , especially racine and boileau , who on four previous occasions had ensured his rejection . he was thus a member both of the academy of inscriptions and of the academy of sciences ; and in 1697 he became perpetual secretary to the latter , an office he held for forty-two years ; and it was in this official capacity that he wrote the histoire du renouvellement de l'académie des sciences ( paris , 3 vols . , 1708 , 1717 , 1722 ) containing extracts and analyses of the proceedings , and also the éloges of the members , written with great simplicity and delicacy . perhaps the best known of his éloges , of which there are sixty-nine in all , is that of his uncle pierre corneille . this was first printed in the nouvelles de la republique des lettres ( january 1685 ) and , as vie de corneille , was included in all the editions of fontenelle 's œuvres . the other important works of fontenelle are his éléments de la géometrie de l'infini ( 1727 ) and his théorie des tourbillons ( 1752 ) . in the latter he supported the views of rené descartes concerning gravitation , material that by that time had effectively been superseded by the work of isaac newton . he is noted for the accessibility of his work – particularly its novelistic style . this allowed non-scientists to appreciate scientific development in a time where this was unusual , and scientists to benefit from the thoughts of the greater society . if his writing is often seen as trying to popularize the astronomical theories of descartes , whose greatest exponent he is sometimes considered , it also appealed to the literate society of the day to become more involved in '' natural philosophy , '' thus enriching the work of early-enlightenment scientists . in spite of the inarguable value and quality of his writings , he had no serious pretensions to original scientific or mathematical work , but did not let that stop him from outspoken support for descartes ' proposed conceptions of the roles of vortices in physics . . legacy . fontenelle was a popular figure in the educated french society of his period , holding a position of esteem comparable only to that of voltaire . unlike voltaire however , fontenelle avoided making important enemies . he balanced his penchant for universal critical thought with liberal doses of flattery and praise to the appropriate individuals in aristocratic society . fontenelle forms a link between two very widely different periods of french literature , that of corneille , racine and boileau on the one hand , and that of voltaire , d'alembert and diderot on the other . it is not in virtue of his great age alone that this can be said of him ; he actually had much in common with the beaux esprits of the 17th century , as well as with the philosophes of the 18th . but it is to the latter rather than to the former period that he properly belongs . according to charles augustin sainte-beuve , he deserves a place '' dans la classe des esprits infiniment distingués '' —distinguished , however , it ought to be added by intelligence rather than by intellect , and less by the power of saying much than by the power of saying a little well . there have been several collected editions of fontenelle 's works , the first being printed in 3 vols . at the hague in 1728–1729 . the best is that of paris , in 8 vols . , 1790 . some of his separate works have been frequently reprinted and also translated . the pluralité des mondes was translated into modern greek in 1794 . sainte-beuve has an interesting essay on fontenelle , with several useful references , in the causeries du lundi , vol . iii . see also villemain , tableau de la littérature française au xviiie siècle ; the abbé trublet , mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de la vie et des ouvrages de m . de fontenelle ( 1759 ) ; a laborde-milaà , fontenelle ( 1905 ) , in the '' grands écrivains français '' series ; and l . maigron , fontenelle , l'homme , l'œuvre , l'influence ( paris , 1906 ) . his dialogues of the dead show both his erudition and wit , by presenting invented – but plausible – dialogues between dead ancients , dead moderns and a whole book devoted to dialogues between an ancient and a modern . to montaigne asking him if some centuries had more wise men than other , socrates answers sadly that '' the general order of natures seems very constant '' . in one of the books roxelane and anne boleyn discuss about politics and the way for a woman to decide a man to marry her . the dialog between montezuma and cortez allows the former to dismiss some myths about the wisdom in ancient greece by quoting some counter-examples . in 1935 , the lunar crater fontenelle was named after him . references . . external links .