Music tracker

history . 1987 : origins on the amiga . the term tracker derives from ultimate soundtracker ( the first tracker software ) written by karsten obarski and released in 1987 by eas computer technik for the commodore amiga . ultimate soundtracker was a commercial product , but soon shareware clones such as noisetracker appeared as well . the general concept of step-sequencing samples numerically , as used in trackers , is also found in the fairlight cmi sampling workstation of the early 1980s . some early tracker-like programs appeared for the msx ( yamaha cx5m ) and commodore 64 , before 1987 , such as sound monitor , but these did not feature sample playback , instead playing notes on the computer 's internal synthesizer . later , programs like rock monitor also supported additional sample playback , usually with short drum samples loaded in ram memory . the first trackers supported four pitch and volume modulated channels of 8-bit pcm samples , a limitation derived from the amiga 's paula audio chipset and the commonplace 8svx format used to store sampled sound . however , since the notes were samples , the limitation was less important than those of synthesizing music chips . commodore 's sid or general instruments ' venerable ay-3-8912 and yamaha 's compatible ym2149 . . 1990s : ms-dos pc versions . during the 1990s , tracker musicians gravitated to the pc as software production in general switched from the amiga platform to the pc . although the ibm and compatibles initially lacked the hardware sound processing capabilities of the amiga , with the advent of the sound blaster line from creative , pc audio slowly began to approach cd quality ( 44,100 hz ) with the release of the soundblaster 16 . another sound card popular on the pc tracker scene was the gravis ultrasound , which continued the hardware mixing tradition , with 32 internal channels and onboard memory for sample storage . for a time , it offered unparalleled sound quality and became the choice of discerning tracker musicians . understanding that the support of tracker music would benefit sales , gravis gave away some 6000 gus cards to participants . coupled with excellent developer documentation , this gesture quickly prompted the gus to become an integral component of many tracking programs and software . inevitably , the balance was largely redressed with the introduction of the sound blaster awe32 and its successors , which also featured on-board ram and wavetable ( or sample table ) mixing . the responsibility for audio mixing passed from hardware to software ( the main cpu ) which gradually enabled the use of more channels . from the typical 4 mod channels of the amiga , the limit had moved to 7 with tfmx players and 8 , first with oktalyzer and later with the vastly more popular octamed ( all amiga programs ) , then 32 with screamtracker 3 and fasttracker 2 on the pc and on to 64 with impulse tracker ( pc ) and med soundstudio ( amiga and later pc ) . an amiga tracker called symphonie pro even supported 256 channels . as such , hardware mixing did not last . as processors got faster and acquired special multimedia processing abilities ( e.g . mmx ) and companies began to push hardware abstraction layers , like directx , the awe and gus range became obsolete . directx , wdm and , now more commonly , asio , deliver high-quality sampled audio irrespective of hardware brand . there was also a split off from the sample based trackers taking advantage of the opl2 and opl3 chips of the sound blaster series . all sound tracker was able to combine both the fm synthesis of the opl chips and the sample based synthesis of the emu-8000 chips in the sound blaster awe series of cards as well as midi output to any additional hardware of choice . jeskola buzz is a modular music studio developed from 1997-2000 for microsoft windows using a tracker as its sequencer where the sounds where produced by virtual machines ( buzzmachines ) such as signal generators , synthesizer emulators , drum computers , samplers , effects and control machines , that where connected in a modular setup . each machine would have its own tracker , drum machines would use a tracker-like drum pattern editor and effect and control machines could be automated tracker-like via tables of parameters . 2000s : multiple platforms . tracker music could be found in computer games of the late 1990s and early 2000s , such as the unreal series , deus ex , crusader : no remorse , jazz jackrabbit and uplink . some of the early amiga trackers such as protracker and octamed have received various updates , mostly for porting to other platforms . protracker having resumed development in 2004 , with plans for releasing version 5 to windows and amigaos , but only version 4.0 beta 2 for amigaos has been released . during 2007 , renoise and openmpt were presented in computer music magazine as professional and inexpensive alternative to other music production software . . terminology . there are several elements common to any tracker program : samples , notes , effects , tracks ( or channels ) , patterns , and orders . a sample is a small digital sound file of an instrument , voice , or other sound effect . most trackers allow a part of the sample to be looped , simulating a sustain of a note . a note designates the frequency at which the sample is played back . by increasing or decreasing the playback speed of a digital sample , the pitch is raised or lowered , simulating instrumental notes ( e.g . c , c , d , etc . ) . an effect is a special function applied to a particular note . these effects are then applied during playback through either hardware or software . common tracker effects include volume , portamento , vibrato , retrigger , and arpeggio . a track ( or channel ) is a space where one sample is played back at a time . whereas the original amiga trackers only provided four tracks , the hardware limit , modern trackers can mix a virtually unlimited number of channels into one sound stream through software mixing . tracks have a fixed number of '' rows '' on which notes and effects can be placed ( most trackers lay out tracks in a vertical fashion ) . tracks typically contain 64 rows and 16 beats , although the beats and tempo can be increased or decreased to the composer 's taste . a basic drum set could thus be arranged by putting a bass drum at rows 0 , 4 , 8 , 12 etc . of one track and putting some hihat at rows 2 , 6 , 10 , 14 etc . of a second track . of course , bass and hats could be interleaved on the same track , if the samples are short enough . if not , the previous sample is usually stopped when the next one begins . some modern trackers simulate polyphony in a single track by setting the '' new note action '' of each instrument to cut , continue , fade out , or release , opening new mixing channels as necessary . a pattern is a group of simultaneously played tracks that represents a full section of the song . a pattern usually represents an even number of measures of music composition . an order is part of a sequence of patterns that defines the layout of a song . patterns can be repeated across multiple orders to save tracking time and file space . there are also some tracker-like programs that utilize tracker-style sequencing schemes , while using real-time sound synthesis instead of samples . many of these programs are designed for creating music for a particular synthesizer chip such as the opl chips of the adlib and soundblaster sound cards , or the sound chips of classic home computers . tracker music is typically stored in module files where the song data and samples are encapsulated in a single file . several module file formats are supported by popular audio players . well-known formats include mod , med , s3m , xm and it . many of these formats can also be imported into existing trackers , allowing to view arrangement , instrumentation and the use of effect commands . this also makes the self-teaching of music composition using trackers easier and allows to extract instruments for later use in own songs , which was very common .