Melanie Klein

life . melanie klein was born into a jewish family and spent most of her early life in vienna . she was the fourth and final child of parents moriz , a doctor , and libussa reizes . educated at the gymnasium , klein planned to study medicine . her family 's loss of wealth caused her to change her plans . at the age of 21 she married an industrial chemist , arthur klein , and soon after gave birth to their first child , melitta . her son hans followed in 1907 and her second son erich was born in 1914 . while she would go on to bear two additional children , klein suffered from clinical depression , with these pregnancies taking quite a toll on her . this and her unhappy marriage soon led klein to seek treatment . shortly after her family moved to budapest in 1910 , klein began a course of therapy with psychoanalyst sándor ferenczi . it was during their time together that klein expressed interest in the study of psychoanalysis . encouraged by ferenczi , klein began her studies by observing her own children . until this time , only minimal documentation existed on the topic of psychoanalysis in children , klein took advantage of this by developing her '' play therapy '' . similar to that of free association in adult psychoanalysis , klein 's play technique sought to interpret the unconscious meaning behind the play and interaction of children . during 1921 , with her marriage failing , klein moved to berlin where she joined the berlin psycho-analytic society under the tutelage of karl abraham . although abraham supported her pioneering work with children , neither klein nor her ideas received much support in berlin . as a divorced woman whose academic qualifications did not even include a bachelor 's degree , klein was a visible iconoclast within a profession dominated by male physicians . nevertheless , klein 's early work had a strong influence on the developing theories and techniques of psychoanalysis , particularly in great britain . her theories on human development and defense mechanisms were a source of controversy , as they conflicted with freud 's theories on development , and caused much discussion in the world of developmental psychology . around the same time klein presented her ideas , anna freud was doing the very same . the two became unofficial rivals of sorts , amid the protracted debates between the followers of klein and the followers of freud . amid these so-called 'controversial discussions ' , the british psychoanalytical society split into three separate training divisions : ( 1 ) kleinian , ( 2 ) freudian , and ( 3 ) independent . these debates finally ceased with an agreement on a dual approach to instruction in the field of child analysis . contributions to psychoanalysis . klein was one of the first to use traditional psychoanalysis with young children . she was innovative in both her techniques horacio etchegoyen : the fundamentals of psychoanalytic technique , karnac books ed . , new ed , 2005 , ( such as working with children using toys ) and her theories on infant development . gaining the respect of those in the academic community , klein established a highly influential training program in psychoanalysis . by observing and analyzing the play and interactions of children , klein built onto the work of freud 's unconscious mind . her dive into the unconscious mind of the infant yielded the findings of the early oedipus complex , as well as the developmental roots of the superego . klein 's theoretical work incorporates freud 's belief in the existence of the death drive , reflecting the notion that all living organisms are inherently drawn toward an '' inorganic '' state , and therefore , somehow , towards death . in psychological terms , eros ( properly , the life pulsation ) , the postulated sustaining and uniting principle of life , is thereby presumed to have a companion force , thanatos ( death pulsation ) , which seeks to terminate and disintegrate life . both freud and klein regarded these '' biomental '' forces as the foundations of the psyche . these primary unconscious forces , whose mental matrix is the id , spark the ego—the experiencing self—into activity . id , ego and superego , to be sure , were merely shorthand terms ( similar to the instincts ) referring to highly complex and mostly uncharted psychodynamic operations . infant observations . klein ’ s work on the importance of observing infants began in 1935 with a public lecture on weaning . klein states that maternal bond are built on more than feeding and developing the infant ’ s attachment ; the mother ’ s attachment and bond with her baby is just as important , if not more . klein came to this conclusion by using actual observations of & nbsp ; herself and mothers that she knew . she described how infants show interest in their mothers ' face , the touch of their mothers ' hands , and the infants ' pleasure in touching their mothers ' breast . the relationship is built on affection that emerges very soon after birth . klein says that as early as two months , infants show interest in the mother that goes beyond feeding . she observed that the infant will often smile up at the mother and cuddle against her chest . the way the infant reacts and responds to their mother 's attitude and feelings , the love and interest which the infant shows , accounts for an object relation . klein also goes on to say that infants recognize the joy that their achievements give their parents . these achievements include crawling and walking . in one observation , klein says that the infant wishes to evoke love in their mother with their achievements . the infant wishes to give her pleasure . klein says that the infant notices that their smile makes their mother happy and results in the attention of her . the infant also recognizes that their smile may serve a better purpose than their cry . klein also talks about the '' apathy '' baby . she says that it is easy to mistake a baby that does not particularly dislike their food and cries a little for a happy baby . development later shows that some of these easy-going babies are not happy . their lack of crying may be due to some kind of apathy . it is hard to assess a young person 's state of mind without allowing for a great complexity of emotions . when these babies are followed up on we see that a great deal of difficulty appears . these children are often shy of people , and their interest in the external world , play , and learning is inhibited . they are often slow at learning to crawl and walk because there seems to be little incentive . they are often showing signs of neurosis as their development goes on . . child analysis . while freud 's ideas concerning children mostly came from working with adult patients , klein was innovative in working directly with children , often as young as two years old . klein saw children 's play as their primary mode of emotional communication . while observing children play with toys such as dolls , animals , plasticine , pencil and paper , klein documented their activities and interactions , then attempted to interpret the unconscious meaning behind their play . following freud she emphasized the significant role that parental figures played in the child 's fantasy life , and considered that the timing of freud 's oedipus complex was incorrect . contradicting freud , she concluded that the superego was present from birth . after exploring ultra-aggressive fantasies of hate , envy , and greed in very young and disturbed children , melanie klein proposed a model of the human psyche that linked significant oscillations of state , with the postulated eros or thanatos pulsations . she named the state of the psyche in which the sustaining principle of life is in domination the depressive position . this is considered by many to be her great contribution to psychoanalytic thought . she later developed her ideas about an earlier developmental psychological state corresponding to the disintegrating tendency of life , which she called the paranoid-schizoid position . klein 's insistence on regarding aggression as an important force in its own right when analysing children brought her into conflict with freud 's daughter anna freud , who was one of the other prominent child psychotherapists in continental europe but who moved to london in 1938 where klein had been working for several years . many controversies arose from this conflict , and these are often referred to as the controversial discussions . battles were played out between the two sides , each presenting scientific papers , working out their respective positions and where they differed , during war-time britain . a compromise was eventually reached whereby three distinct training groups were formed within the british psychoanalytical society , with anna freud 's influence remaining largely predominant in the us . object relation theory . klein is known to be one of the primary founders of object relations theory . this theory of psychoanalysis is based on the assumption that all individuals have within them an internalized , and primarily unconscious realm of relationships . these relationships refer not only to the world around the individual , but more specifically to other individuals surrounding the subject . object relation theory focuses primarily on the interaction individuals have with others , how those interactions are internalized , and how these now internalized object relations affect one 's psychological framework . the term '' object '' refers to the potential embodiment of fear , desire , envy or other comparable emotions . the object and the subject are separated , allowing for a more simplistic approach to addressing the deprived areas of need when used in the clinical setting . klein ’ s approach differed from anna freuds ego-psychology approach . klein explored the interpersonal aspect of the structural model . in the mid-1920s , she thought differently about the first mode of defense . klein thought it was expulsion while freud said speculated it was repression ( stein,1990 ) . klein suggested that the infant could relate to its mother from birth which were deemed either “ good ” or “ bad ” and internalized as archaic part-object . out of this , a phantasy life develops in the infant . because of this , klein ’ s beliefs required her to proclaim that an ego exists from birth that enables an infant to relate to others early in life ( likierman & urban , 1999 ) . influence on feminism . in dorothy dinnerstein ’ s book the mermaid and the minotaur ( 1976 ) ( also published in the uk as the rocking of the cradle and the ruling of the world ) , drawing from elements of sigmund freud ’ s psychoanalysis , particularly as developed by klein , dinnerstein argued that sexism and aggression are both inevitable consequences of child rearing being left exclusively to women . dinnerstein , dorothy ( 1987 ) . the rocking of the cradle and the ruling of the world ( trade paperback ) ( reprint with new introduction ed . ) . london : the women 's press . p . 26 and 33–34 . as a solution , dinnerstein proposed that men and women equally share infant and child care responsibilities . dinnerstein , dorothy ( 1987 ) . the rocking of the cradle and the ruling of the world . london : women 's press . this book became a classic of u.s . second-wave feminism and was later translated into seven languages . '' dorothy dinnerstein ; feminist writer was 69 '' ( obituary ) . the new york times . december 19 , 1992 . retrieved april 2 , 2011 . . in popular culture . melanie klein was the subject of a 1988 play by nicholas wright , entitled mrs . klein . set in london in 1934 , the play involves a conflict between melanie klein and her daughter melitta schmideberg , after the death of melanie 's son hans klein . the depiction of melanie klein is quite unfavorable : the play suggests that hans ' death was a suicide and also reveals that klein had analysed these two children . in the original production at the cottesloe theatre in london , gillian barge played melanie klein , with zoë wanamaker and francesca annis playing the supporting roles . in the 1995 new york revival of the play , melanie klein was played by uta hagen , who described melanie klein as a role that she was meant to play . ben brantley , '' theater review : uta hagen returns , tossing wine , '' new york times , 25 october 1995 . the play was broadcast on the british radio station bbc 4 in 2008 and revived at the almeida theatre in london in october 2009 with clare higgins as melanie klein . the indie band volcano suns dedicated their first record '' the bright orange years '' to klein for her work on childhood aggression . scottish author alexander mccall smith makes extensive use of melanie klein and her theories in his 44 scotland street series . one of the characters , irene , has an obsession with kleinian theory , and uses it to '' guide '' her in the upbringing of her son , bertie . bibliography . melanie klein 's works are collected in four volumes : the collected writings of melanie klein volume 1 – love , guilt and reparation : and other works 1921–1945 , london : hogarth press . volume 2 – the psychoanalysis of children , london : hogarth press . volume 3 – envy and gratitude , london : hogarth press . volume 4 – narrative of a child analysis , london : hogarth press . books on melanie klein : r.d . hinshelwood , susan robinson , oscar zarate , introducing melanie klein , icon books uk 2003 robert hinshelwood , a dictionary of kleinian thought , free association books uk 1989 robert hinshelwood , clinical klein , free association books uk 1993 melanie klein , 'the autobiography of melanie klein ' ed . janet sayers with john forrester , psychoanalysis and history 15.2 ( 2013 ) pp . & nbsp ; 127–63 mary l jacobus , '' the poetics of psychoanalysis : in the wake of klein '' , oxford university press , 2006 , julia kristeva , melanie klein ( european perspectives : a series in social thought and cultural criticism ) tr . ross guberman , columbia university press , 2004 donald meltzer : fr : donald meltzer '' the kleinian development ( new edition ) '' , publisher : karnac books ; reprint edition 1998 , donald meltzer : '' dream-life : a re-examination of the psycho-analytical theory and technique '' publisher : karnac books , 1983 , meira likierman , '' melanie klein , her work in context '' continuum international , paperback , 2002 hanna segal : fr : hanna segal : '' klein '' publisher : karnac books ; reprint edition ( 1989 ) '' the work of hanna segal : a kleinian approach to clinical practice ( classical psychoanalysis and its applications ) '' publisher : jason aronson , 1993 ) , '' dream , phantasy and art '' publisher : routledge ; 1 edition 1990 , transcript of a seminar titled '' motivation : the artist and the psychoanalyst '' john steiner : fr : john steiner : '' psychic retreats '' ( . ) relative peace and protection from strain when meaningful contact with the analyst is experienced as ( . ) , publisher : routledge ; 1993 , c . fred alford , melanie klein and critical social theory : an account of politics , art , and reason based on her psychoanalytic theory , yale up 1990 herbert rosenfeld : fr : herbert rosenfeld : '' impasse and interpretation : therapeutic and anti-therapeutic factors in the psycho-analytic treatment of psychotic , borderline , and neurotic patients '' , publisher : tavistock publications , 1987 , julia segal : ( 1992 ) . melanie klein . london : sage . ronald britton : '' sex , death , and the superego : experiences in psychoanalysis '' , publisher : karnac books ; 2003 , ronald britton : '' belief and imagination '' , publisher : taylor & francis ltd ; 1998 , monique lauret et jean-philippe raynaud , '' melanie klein , une pensée vivante '' , presses universitaires de france , 2008 , . see also .