1986 in literature

events . april 29 – a major fire at los angeles public library caused by arson destroys 400,000 volumes . july 21 – michael grade , controller of bbc1 , axes plans to televise ian curteis 's the falklands play . september 29 – bloomsbury publishing is set up in london by nigel newton . october 9 – the phantom of the opera , having been the longest running broadway show ever , opens at her majesty 's theatre in london . december 19 – the soviet dissident author andrei sakharov is allowed to return to moscow after six years ' internal exile . new books . fiction . kingsley amis – the old devils v . c . andrews – garden of shadows piers anthony – ghost jeffrey archer – a matter of honour james axler – pilgrimage to hell and red holocaust iain banks – the bridge thomas bernhard – extinction ( auslöschung ) azouz begag – le gone du chaâba anita brookner – a misalliance orson scott card – speaker for the dead ana castillo – mixquiahuala letters tom clancy – red storm rising arthur c . clarke – the songs of distant earth james clavell – whirlwind jackie collins – hollywood husbands pat conroy – the prince of tides hugh cook – the wizards and the warriors bernard cornwell – sharpe 's regiment bernard cornwell ( as susannah kells ) – coat of arms ( also as the aristocrats ) fernando del paso – noticias del imperio marguerite duras – blue eyes , black hair james ellroy – silent terror shusaku endo ( 遠藤 周作 ) – scandal ( スキャンダル ) steve erickson – rubicon beach nuruddin farah – maps ( first part of blood in the sun trilogy ) richard ford – the sportswriter katherine v . forrest – an emergence of green john gardner – nobody lives for ever jacques godbout – une histoire américaine peter handke – repetition ernest hemingway - the garden of eden carl hiaasen – tourist season kazuo ishiguro – an artist of the floating world brian jacques – redwall stephen king – it ivan klíma – láska a smetí ( love and garbage , banned until 1989 ) judith krantz – i 'll take manhattan brigitte kronauer – berittener bogenschütze louis l'amour – last of the breed joe r . lansdale – dead in the west john le carré – a perfect spy david leavitt – the lost language of cranes tanith lee – dreams of dark and light : the great short fiction of tanith lee gordon lish – dear mr . capote h . p . lovecraft – dagon and other macabre tales ( corrected edition ) robert ludlum – the bourne supremacy amin maalouf – leo africanus javier marías – el hombre sentimental ( the man of feeling , 2003 ) allan massie – augustus ( first in the roman series ) frank miller – batman : the dark knight returns ( graphic novel ) robert munsch – love you forever patrick o'brian – the reverse of the medal ellis peters the raven in the foregate the rose rent terry pratchett – the light fantastic reynolds price – kate vaiden james purdy – in the hollow of his hand jean raspail – who will remember the people . mercè rodoreda ( died 1983 ) – la mort i la primavera ( death in spring ) rafael sánchez ferlosio – el testimonio de yarfoz josé saramago – the year of the death of ricardo reis ( o ano da morte de ricardo reis ) ken saro-wiwa – sozaboy : a novel in rotten english idries shah – kara kush danielle steel – wanderlust peter taylor – a summons to memphis james tiptree , jr . – tales of the quintana roo mario vargas llosa – who killed palomino molero ? ( ¿quién mató a palomino molero ? ) vladimir voinovich – moscow 2042 roger zelazny – blood of amber . children and young people . janet and allan ahlberg – the jolly postman chris van allsburg - the stranger tony bradman – dilly the dinosaur ( first in the eponymous series of 22 books ) steven brust ( with alan lee ) - brokedown palace robert j . burch – queenie peavy joy cowley ( with jan van der voo ) – turnips for dinner ( with martin bailey ) – the king 's pudding crescent dragonwagon – half a moon and one whole star jill eggleton ( with kelvin hawley ) – cat and mouse berniece t . hiser – the adventure of charlie and his wheat-straw hat diana wynne jones – howl 's moving castle michael de larrabeiti the borribles : across the dark metropolis the provençal tales arnold lobel - the random house book of mother goose ( in verse ) ann m . martin kristy 's great idea claudia and the phantom phone calls the truth about stacey ( first three in the baby-sitters club series of over 200 books , 35 written by martin ) patricia mckissack – flossie & the fox robert munsch – love you forever jenny nimmo – the snow spider ( first in the magician trilogy ) bill peet – zella , zack , and zodiac alison prince – the type one super robot gillian rubinstein – space demons claude ponti – adele 's album . drama . caryl churchill and david lan – a mouthful of birds nick darke – the dead monkey tomson highway – the rez sisters willy russell – shirley valentine . poetry . kama sywor kamanda – chants de brumes ( songs of twilight ) . non-fiction . martin amis – the moronic inferno : and other visits to america bernard bailyn – voyagers to the west : a passage in the peopling of america on the eve of the revolution frank barlow – thomas becket marjorie chibnall – anglo-norman england 1066–1166 richard dawkins – the blind watchmaker karlheinz deschner – kriminalgeschichte des christentums ( criminal history of christianity ) adrian edmondson et al . – how to be a complete bastard sita ram goel – history of hindu–christian encounters , ad 304 to 1996 temple grandin ( with margaret scariano ) – emergence : labeled autistic patience gray – honey from a weed ( cookery ) robert irwin – the middle east in the middle ages : the early mamlúk sultanate 1250–1382 kumari jayawardena – feminism and nationalism in the third world mark mathabane – kaffir boy farley mowat – my discovery of america harvey pekar – american splendor ( graphic autobiography ) marc reisner – cadillac desert richard rhodes – the making of the atomic bomb jonathan riley-smith – the first crusade and the idea of crusading roger scruton – sexual desire : a philosophical investigation art spiegelman – maus ( graphic biography/autobiography ) jean vercoutter – the search for ancient egypt mary wilson – dreamgirl : my life as a supreme . births . july 3 – chris bush , english playwright , artistic director and comedian unknown dates caroline bird , english poet and dramatist chigozie obioma , nigerian novelist . deaths . january 1 – lord david cecil , english critic and biographer ( born 1902 ) january 4 – christopher isherwood , english-born novelist ( born 1904 ) january 7 p . d . eastman , american author and illustrator ( born 1909 ) juan rulfo , mexican writer , screenwriter and photographer ( born 1917 ) january 24 – l . ron hubbard , american science fiction writer , founder of scientology ( born 1911 ) february 4 – phyllis shand allfrey , dominican writer ( born 1908 ) february 9 – dora oake russell , newfoundland writer , diarist and journalist ( born 1912 ) february 11 – frank herbert , american science fiction novelist ( born 1920 ) february 28 – edith ditmas , english archivist , historian and writer ( born 1896 ) march 4 ding ling , chinese fiction writer ( born 1904 ) elizabeth smart , canadian poet and novelist ( born 1913 ) march 15 – pandelis prevelakis , greek novelist , poet , dramatist and essayist ( born 1909 ) march 18 – bernard malamud , american novelist ( born 1914 ) april 12 – valentin kataev , russian novelist and dramatist ( born 1897 ) april 14 simone de beauvoir , french philosopher and feminist writer ( born 1908 ) jean genet , french novelist , playwright , poet , essayist and political activist ( born 1910 ) april 17 – bessie head , botswanan fiction writer ( born 1937 ) april 22 – mircea eliade , romanian historian , philosopher and novelist ( born 1907 ) may 15 – theodore h . white , american journalist , historian and novelist ( born 1915 ) june 14 – jorge luis borges , argentine writer ( born 1899 ) august 1 – lena kennedy , english romantic novelist ( born 1914 ) august 3 – beryl markham , english-born kenyan aviator and author ( born 1902 ) august 20 – milton acorn , canadian poet , writer and playwright ( born 1923 ) september 11 – noel streatfeild , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1895 ) december 17 – j . f . hendry , scottish poet ( born 1912 ) december 19 – v . c . andrews , american novelist ( born 1923 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : wole soyinka . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : robin walton , glace fruits c . j . dennis prize for poetry : rhyll mcmaster , washing the money and john a . scott , st . clair kenneth slessor prize for poetry : robert gray selected poems 1963–83 mary gilmore prize : stephen williams , a crowd of voices miles franklin award : elizabeth jolley , the well . canada . see 1986 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : michel host , valet de nuit prix médicis french : pierre combescot , les funérailles de la sardine prix médicis international : john hawkes , aventures dans le commerce des peaux en alaska . united kingdom . booker prize : kingsley amis , the old devils carnegie medal for children 's literature : berlie doherty , granny was a buffer girl cholmondeley award : lawrence durrell , james fenton , selima hill eric gregory award : mick north , lachlan mackinnon , oliver reynolds , stephen romer james tait black memorial prize for fiction : jenny joseph , persephone james tait black memorial prize for biography : d . felicitas corrigan , helen waddell queen 's gold medal for poetry : norman maccaig 1986 whitbread awards : kazuo ishiguro , an artist of the floating world . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : robley wilson , kingdoms of the ordinary american academy of arts and letters gold medals drama : sidney kingsley frost medal : allen ginsberg / richard eberhart nebula award : orson scott card , speaker for the dead newbery medal for children 's literature : patricia maclachlan , sarah , plain and tall prometheus award : robert shea and robert anton wilson , the illuminatus ! trilogy pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : larry mcmurtry , lonesome dove pulitzer prize for poetry : henry taylor , the flying change whiting awards : fiction : kent haruf , denis johnson , padgett powell , mona simpson ; poetry : john ash , hayden carruth , frank stewart , ruth stone ; nonfiction : darryl pinckney ( nonfiction/fiction ) ; plays : august wilson . elsewhere . premio nadal : manuel vicent , balada de caín . references .