Thus Spoke Zarathustra

origins . thus spoke zarathustra , the ideas of which first came to nietzsche while walking on two roads surrounding rapallo , was conceived while writing the gay science . according to elisabeth förster-nietzsche in the introduction of thomas common 's early translation of the book , nietzsche wrote that the ideas for zarathustra first came to him while walking on two roads surrounding rapallo . more specifically , the concept of the eternal return , which is the central idea of zarathustra by nietzsche 's admission , first occurred to nietzsche in switzerland : he was inspired by the sight of a gigantic , towering , pyramidal rock—a '' pyramidal block of stone '' —while walking through the woods along the shores of lake silvaplana , in the engadin , a high alpine region whose valley floor is at . as evidence of this , he made a small note that read '' 6,000 feet beyond man and time . '' gutmann , james . 1954 . '' the 'tremendous moment ' of nietzsche 's vision . '' the journal of philosophy 51 ( 25 ) :837–42 . nietzsche planned to write the book in three parts over several years . although part three was originally planned to be the end of the book , ending with a strong climax , nietzsche subsequently decided to write an additional three parts ; ultimately , however , he composed only the fourth part , which is viewed to constitute an intermezzo . nietzsche commented in ecce homo that for the completion of each part , '' ten days sufficed ; in no case , neither for the first nor for the third and last , did i require more . '' nietzsche , friedrich . publ . 1908 1967 . ecce homo , translated and edited by w . kaufmann . new york : vintage . the first three parts were first published separately , and were subsequently published in a single volume in 1887 . the fourth part remained private after nietzsche wrote it in 1885 ; a scant forty copies were all that were printed , apart from seven others that were distributed to nietzsche 's close friends . in march 1892 , the four parts were finally reprinted as a single volume . since then , the version most commonly produced has included all four parts . the original text contains a great deal of word play . for instance , words beginning with über ( 'over , above ' ) and ( 'down , below ' ) are often paired to emphasise the contrast , which is not always possible to bring out in translation , except by coinages . an example is untergang ( lit . 'down-going ' ) , which is used in german to mean 'setting ' ( as in , of the sun ) , but also 'sinking ' , 'demise ' , 'downfall ' , or 'doom ' . nietzsche pairs this word with its opposite übergang ( 'over-going ' ) , used to mean 'transition ' . another example is übermensch ( 'overman ' or 'superman ' ) , discussed later in this article . synopsis . the book chronicles the fictitious travels and speeches of zarathustra . zarathustra 's namesake was the founder of zoroastrianism , usually known in english as zoroaster ( , zaraθuštra ) . nietzsche is clearly portraying a '' new '' or '' different '' zarathustra , one who transvaluation of values . he goes on to characterize '' what the name of zarathustra means in my mouth , the mouth of the first immoralist : '' zarathustra has a simple characterisation and plot , pippin , robert . 2006 . '' nietzsche : thus spoke zarathustra . '' in cambridge texts in the history of philosophy . chicago : university of chicago . p . ix . narrated sporadically throughout the text . it possesses a unique experimental style , one that is , for instance , evident in newly invented '' dithyrambs '' narrated or sung by zarathustra . likewise , the separate dionysian-dithyrambs was written in autumn 1888 , and printed with the full volume in 1892 , as the corollaries of zarathustra 's '' abundance . '' some speculate that nietzsche intended to write about final acts of creation and destruction brought on by zarathustra . however , the book lacks a finale to match such description ; its actual ending focuses more on zarathustra recognizing that his legacy is beginning to perpetuate , and consequently choosing to leave the higher men to their own devices in carrying his legacy forth . zarathustra also contains the famous dictum '' god is dead , '' which had appeared earlier in the gay science . nietzsche , friedrich wilhelm . '' how one becomes what one is : with a prelude in german rhymes and an appendix of songs . '' random house , 1974 . p . xii . the book embodies a number of innovative poetical and rhetorical methods of expression . it serves as a parallel and supplement to the various philosophical ideas present in nietzsche 's body of work . he has , however , said that '' among my writings my zarathustra stands to my mind by itself . '' nietzsche , friedrich . publ . 1908 1967 . '' preface . '' in ecce homo , translated and edited by w . kaufmann . new york : vintage . § 4 . emphasizing its centrality and its status as his masterpiece , nietzsche has stated that : since many of the book 's ideas are also present in his other works , zarathustra is seen to have served as a precursor to his later philosophical thought . with the book , nietzsche embraced a distinct aesthetic assiduity . he later reformulated many of his ideas in beyond good and evil and various other writings that he composed thereafter . he continued to emphasize his philosophical concerns ; generally , his intention was to show an alternative to repressive moral codes and to avert '' nihilism '' in all of its varied forms . other aspects of thus spoke zarathustra relate to nietzsche 's proposed '' transvaluation of values '' . this incomplete project began with the antichrist . themes . while nietzsche injects myriad ideas into the book , a few recurring themes stand out . übermensch . a singular feature of zarathustra , first presented in the prologue , is the designation of human beings as a transition between apes and the übermensch ( 'overman , superman ' ; or 'overhuman , superhuman ' ) . english translators common ( 1909 ) and hollingdale ( 1961 ) use superman ; kaufmann uses overman ; and parkes ( 2005 ) uses overhuman . martin ( 2005 ) has opted to leave the almost universally understood term as übermensch in his new translation . the overman ( übermensch ) , a self-mastered individual who has achieved his full power , is a nearly omnipresent concept in the book , whereby humankind is merely a bridge between animals and the overman . it is one of the many interconnecting , interdependent themes of the story , and is represented through several different metaphor , including , for example : the lightning that is portended by the silence and raindrops of a travelling storm cloud ; the sun 's rise and culmination at its midday zenith ; and a man traversing a rope stationed above an abyss , moving away from his uncultivated animality and towards the übermensch . the symbol of the übermensch alludes to nietzsche 's notions of '' self-mastery , '' '' self-cultivation , '' '' self-direction , '' and '' self-overcoming . '' expounding these concepts , zarathustra declares : . eternal recurrence . the eternal recurrence is the possibility that all events in one 's life will happen again and again , infinitely . the embrace of all of life 's horrors and pleasures alike shows a deference and acceptance of fate , or amor fati . the love and acceptance of one 's path in life is a defining characteristic of the overman . faced with the knowledge that he would repeat every action that he has taken , an overman would be elated as he has no regrets and loves life . opting to change any decision or event in one 's life would indicate the presence of resentment or fear ; contradistinctly the overman is characterized by courage and a dionysian spirit . in his autobiographical ecce homo , nietzsche states that the book 's underlying concept is discussed within '' the penultimate section of the fourth book '' of the gay science : the eternal recurrence of the same events . the mention of this notion in the gay science ( e.g . , § 341 ) was the first public proclamation of the notion by him . apart from its salient presence in zarathustra , it is also echoed throughout nietzsche 's work . will to power . the will to power is the fundamental component of the human identity . everything we do is an expression of self-realization that can sometimes take a form of a will to power . the will to power is a psychological analysis of all human action and is accentuated by self-overcoming and self-enhancement . contrasted with living for procreation , pleasure , or happiness , the will to power is the summary of all man 's struggle against his surrounding environment as well as his reason for living in it . it is by zarathustra 's transfiguration that he embraces eternity , that he at last ascertains '' the supreme will to power . '' the will to power , sect . 617 ; trans . kaufmann this inspiration finds its expression with zarathustra 's roundelay , featured twice in the book , once near the story 's close : . criticism of christianity . many criticisms of christianity can be found in thus spoke zarathustra , particularly christian values of good and evil and its belief in an afterlife . the basis for his critique of christianity lies in the perceived squandering of our earthly lives in pursuit of a perfect afterlife , of which there is no evidence . this empiricism view ( denial of afterlife ) is not fully examined in a rational argument in the text , but taken as a simple fact in nietzsche 's aphorism writing style . judeo-christian values are more thoroughly examined in on the genealogy of morals as a product of what he calls '' slave morality . '' . style . noteworthy for its format , the book comprises a philosophical work of fiction whose style often lightheartedly imitates that of the new testament and of the platonic dialogues , at times resembling pre-socratic works in tone and in its use of natural phenomena as rhetorical and explanatory devices . it also features frequent references to the western literary and philosophy traditions , implicitly offering an interpretation of these traditions and of their problems . nietzsche achieves all of this through the character of zoroaster ( referring to the traditional prophet of zoroastrianism ) , who makes speeches on philosophic topics as he moves along a loose plotline marking his development and the reception of his ideas . this characteristic ( following the genre of the bildungsroman ) can be seen as an inline commentary on zarathustra 's ( and nietzsche 's ) philosophy . the book has been recognized for its unconventional style , which does not distinguish between philosophy and literature . moreover , it offers formulations of eternal recurrence , and nietzsche for the first time speaks of the übermensch : themes that would dominate his books from this point onwards . . reception . the style of the book , along with its ambiguity and paradox nature , has helped its eventual enthusiastic reception by the reading public , but has frustrated academic attempts at analysis ( as nietzsche may have intended ) . thus spoke zarathustra remained unpopular as a topic for scholars ( especially those in the anglo-american analytic tradition ) until the latter half of the 20th century brought widespread interest in nietzsche and his unconventional style . ernst behler . 1996 . '' nietzsche in the twentieth century . '' pp . 281–319 in the cambridge companion to nietzsche , edited by magnus and higgins . cambridge : cambridge university press . the critic harold bloom criticized thus spoke zarathustra in the western canon ( 1994 ) , calling the book '' a gorgeous disaster '' and '' unreadable . '' other commentators have suggested that nietzsche 's style is intentionally irony for much of the book . this irony relates to an internal conflict of nietzsche 's : he hated religious leaders but perceived himself as at least somewhat akin to one . . translations and editions . translations . the first english translation of zarathustra was published in 1896 by alexander tille . common ( 1909 ) . thomas common published a translation in 1909 which was based on alexander tille 's earlier attempt . nietzsche , friedrich . trans . kaufmann , walter . the portable nietzsche . 1976 , pp . 108–09 . common wrote in the style of shakespeare or the king james version of the bible . common 's poetic interpretation of the text , which renders the title thus spake zarathustra , received wide acclaim for its lambent portrayal . common reasoned that because the original german was written in a pseudo-luther bible , a pseudo-king-james-biblical style would be fitting in the english translation . kaufmann ( 1954 ) and hollingdale ( 1961 ) . the common translation remained widely accepted until more critical translations , titled thus spoke zarathustra , were published by walter kaufmann in 1954 , and r.j . hollingdale in 1961 , nietzsche , friedrich . 1883–1885 1961 . thus spoke zarathustra , translated by r . j . hollingdale . harmondsworth : penguin books . which are considered to convey more accurately the german text than the common version . kaufmann 's introduction to his own translation included a blistering critique of common 's version ; he notes that in one instance , common has taken the german '' most evil '' and rendered it '' baddest '' , a particularly unfortunate error not merely for his having coined the term '' baddest '' , but also because nietzsche dedicated a third of the genealogy of morals to the difference between '' bad '' and '' evil . '' this and other errors led kaufmann to wonder whether common '' had little german and less english . '' the translations of kaufmann and hollingdale render the text in a far more familiar , less archaic , style of language , than that of common . wayne ( 2003 ) . thomas wayne , an english professor at edison state college in fort myers , florida , published a translation in 2003 . the introduction by roger w . phillips , ph.d . , says '' wayne 's close reading of the original text has exposed the deficiencies of earlier translations , preeminent among them that of the highly esteemed walter kaufmann '' , and gives several reasons . martin ( 2005 ) . clancy martin 's 2005 translation opens with criticism and praise for these three seminal translators , common , kaufmann and hollingdale . he notes that the german text available to common was considerably flawed , and that the german text from which hollingdale and kaufmann worked was itself untrue to nietzsche 's own work in some ways . martin criticizes kaufmann for changing punctuation , altering literal and philosophical meanings , and dampening some of nietzsche 's more controversial metaphors . nietzsche , friedrich . trans . martin , clancy . thus spoke zarathustra . 2005 , p . xxxiii . kaufmann 's version , which has become the most widely available , features a translator 's note suggesting that nietzsche 's text would have benefited from an editor ; martin suggests that kaufmann '' took it upon himself to become his nietzsche 's editor . '' . parkes ( 2005 ) and del caro ( 2006 ) . graham parkes describes his own 2005 translation as trying '' above all to convey the musicality of the text . '' parkes , graham . 2005 . '' prologue . '' in thus spoke zarathustra . p . xxxv . in 2006 , cambridge university press published a translation by adrian del caro , edited by robert pippin . selected editions . thus spake zarathustra , translated by alexander tille . new york : macmillan . 1896 . thus spake zarathustra , trans . thomas common . edinburgh : t . n . foulis . 1909 . also sprach zarathustra , edited by giorgio colli and mazzino montinari . munich : deutscher taschenbuch verlag ( study edition of the standard german nietzsche edition ) . thus spoke zarathustra , trans . walter kaufmann . new york : random house . 1954 . reprints : in the portable nietzsche , new york : viking press . 1954 ; harmondsworth : penguin books . 1976 thus spoke zarathustra , trans . r . j . hollingdale . harmondsworth : penguin books . 1961 . also sprach zarathustra ( bilingual ed . ) ( in german and russian ) , with 20 oil painting by lena hades . moscow : institute of philosophy , russian academy of sciences . 2004 . thus spoke zarathustra , trans . graham parkes . oxford : oxford world 's classics . 2005 . thus spoke zarathustra , trans . clancy martin . barnes & noble books . 2005 . thus spoke zarathustra , trans . adrian del caro and edited by robert pippin . cambridge : cambridge university press . 2006 . nietzsche 's 'thus spoke zarathustra ' : before sunrise ( essay collection ) , edited by james luchte . london : bloomsbury publishing . 2008 . commentaries and introductions . naumann , gustav . 1899–1901 . zarathustra-commentar ( in german ) , 4 vols . leipzig : haessel . kathleen higgins . 1987 . 2010 . nietzsche 's zarathustra ( rev . ed . ) . philadelphia : temple university press . osho . 1987 . '' zarathustra : a god that can dance . '' pune , indiana : osho commune international . laurence lampert . 1989 . nietzsche 's teaching : an interpretation of thus spoke zarathustra . new haven : yale university press . stanley rosen . 1995 . the mask of enlightenment : nietzsche 's zarathustra . cambridge : cambridge university press . 2nd ed . new haven : yale university press . 2004 . t . k . seung 2005 . nietzsche 's epic of the soul : thus spoke zarathustra . lanham , maryland : lexington books . zittel , claus . 2011 . das ästhetische kalkül von friedrich nietzsches 'also sprach zarathustra . würzburg : königshausen & neumann . schmidt , rüdiger . '' introduction '' ( in german ) . in nietzsche für anfänger : also sprach zarathustra – eine lese-einführung . musical and literary adaptations . carl orff composed a three-movement setting of part of nietzsche 's text as a teenager , but this work remains unpublished . 1895–1896 : '' zarathustra 's roundelay '' is set as part of gustav mahler 's third symphony , originally under the title what man tells me , or alternatively what the night tells me ( of man ) . 1896 : the book inspired richard strauss to compose the tone poem also sprach zarathustra , which he designated '' freely based on friedrich nietzsche . '' 1904–05 : frederick delius based his major choral-orchestral work a mass of life ( 1904–5 ) on texts from thus spoke zarathustra . the work ends with a setting of '' zarathustra 's roundelay '' which delius had composed earlier , in 1898 , as a separate work . 1944 : the short score of the third symphony by arnold bax originally began with a quotation from thus spoke zarathustra : '' my wisdom became pregnant on lonely mountains ; upon barren stones she brought forth her young . '' 1959–60 : another setting of the roundelay is one of the songs of lukas foss 's time cycle for soprano and orchestra . 1973 : italian progressive rock band museo rosenbach released the album zarathustra , with lyrics referring to the book . 1993 : a film of parts i–iii of the kaufmann translation of '' thus spoke zarathustra '' was made by ronald gerard smith , distributed by films for the humanities and sciences , 2012–19 . smith , ronald gerard . 1993 . '' thus spoke zarathustra . '' 2002–06 : also sprach zarathustra is referenced in the xenosaga video-game series , the plot of which covers similar topics that nietzsche covers in his writings . the book is most explicitly used by the series in its third episode , xenosaga episode iii : also sprach zarathustra ( 2006 ) . 2013 : the title of graphic novel silent was zarathustra by nicolas wild is a reference to nietzsche 's work . 2018-19 : the english translation of part 2 chapter 7 , '' tarantulas '' , has been narrated by jordan peterson 1791 ( user ) . 9 october 2018 . '' tarantulas friedrich nietzsche . '' youtube . retrieved 27 june 2020 . and musically toned by artist akira the don . '' akira the don – tarantulas lyrics . '' genius . retrieved 27 june 2020 . 2019 : in august 2019 , the metal band polemicist released their album zarathustrian impressions , a work of heavy metal impressionism based on the core concepts of the book . . see also . faith in the earth zoroaster and the mount savalan . references . notes .