Viking ships

development . the ship has been functioning as the centerpiece of scandinavian culture for millennia , serving both pragmatic and religious purposes , and its importance was already deeply rooted in the scandinavian culture when the viking age began . scandinavia is a region with relatively high inland mountain ranges , dense forests and easy access to the sea with many natural ports . consequently , trade routes were primarily operated via shipping , as inland travel was both more hazardous and cumbersome . many stone engravings from the nordic stone age and in particular the nordic bronze age , depict ships in various situations and valuable ships were sacrificed as part of ceremonial votive offerings since at least the nordic iron age , as evidenced by the hjortspring and nydam mose . the viking kingdoms developed into coastal towns and forts , all of which were deeply dependent on the north sea and the baltic sea for survival and development . control of the waterways was of critical importance , and consequently , advanced warships were in high demand . because of their overwhelming importance , ships became a mainstay of the viking religion , as they evolved into symbols of power and prowess . throughout the first millennium , respectable viking chieftains and their relatives were commonly buried with an intact , luxurious ship to transport them in the afterlife . furthermore , the hedeby coins , among the earliest known danish currency , have impressions of ships as emblems , showing the importance of naval vessels in the area . through such cultural and practical significance , the viking ship progressed into the most powerful , advanced naval vessel in viking age europe . faering . a faering is an open rowboat with two pairs of oars , commonly found in most boat-building traditions in western and northern scandinavia , dating back to the viking age . what is a norse færing ? ( vikingskip.com ) . knarr . knarr is the norse term for ships that were built for atlantic voyages . they were cargo ships averaging a length of about , a beam of , and a hull capable of carrying up to 24 tons . peter sawyer , ( 1975 ) the oxford illustrated history of the vikings . oxford university press overall displacement : 50 tons . this is shorter than the gokstad type of longships , but knarrs are sturdier by design and they depended mostly on sail-power , only putting oars to use as auxiliaries if there was no wind on the open water . because of this , the knarr was used for longer voyages , ocean-going transports and more hazardous trips than the gokstad type . it was capable of sailing in one day , and held a crew of about 20–30 . knarrs plural of knarr is knerrir . routinely crossed the north atlantic in the viking age , carrying livestock and goods to and from greenland and the north atlantic islands . the design of the knarr later influenced the design of the cog , used in the baltic sea by the hanseatic league . the best-preserved viking age knarr is the äskekärr ship , which was found in sweden in 1933 , and is believed to be from about 930 ad . . longship . longships were naval vessels made and used by the vikings from scandinavia and iceland for trade , commerce , exploration , and warfare during the viking age . the longship 's design evolved over many years , beginning in the stone age with the invention of the umiak and continuing up to the 9th century with the nydam and kvalsund ships . the longship appeared in its complete form between the 9th and 13th centuries . the character and appearance of these ships have been reflected in scandinavian boat-building traditions until today . the average speed of viking ships varied from ship to ship but lay in the range of 5–10 knots , and the maximum speed of a longship under favorable conditions was around 15 knots . the long-ship is characterized as a graceful , long , narrow , light , wooden boat with a shallow draft hull designed for speed . the ship 's shallow draft allowed navigation in waters only one meter deep and permitted beach landings , while its light weight enabled it to be carried over portages . longships were also double-ended , the symmetrical bow and stern allowing the ship to reverse direction quickly without having to turn around ; this trait proved particularly useful in northern latitudes where icebergs and sea ice posed hazards to navigation . longships were fitted with oars along almost the entire length of the boat itself . later versions sported a rectangular sail on a single mast which was used to replace or augment the effort of the rowers , particularly during long journeys . longships can be classified into a number of different types , depending on size , construction details , and prestige . the most common way to classify longships is by the number of rowing positions on board . types ranged from the karvi , with 13 rowing benches , to the busse , one of which has been found with an estimated 34 rowing positions . longships were the epitome of scandinavian naval power at the time and were highly valued possessions . they were often owned by coastal farmers and commissioned by the king in times of conflict , in order to build a powerful naval force . while longships were deployed by the norse in warfare , they were mostly used for troop transports , not as warships . in the tenth century , these boats would sometimes be tied together in battle to form a steady platform for infantry warfare . longships were called dragonships ( drakuskippan ) by the franks because they had a dragon-shaped prow . . karve . the karve was a small type of viking longship , with a broad hull somewhat similar to the knarr . they were used for both war and ordinary transport , carrying people , cargo or livestock . because they were able to navigate in very shallow water , they were also used for coasting . karves had broad beams of approximately . ship construction . viking ships varied from other contemporary ships , being generally more seaworthy and lighter . this was achieved through use of clinker ( lapstrake ) construction . the planks from which viking vessels were constructed were rived ( split ) from large , old-growth trees—especially oaks . a ship 's hull could be as thin as one inch ( 2.5 & nbsp ; cm ) , as a split plank is stronger than a sawed plank found in later craft . lapstrake hull schematic working up from a stout oaken keel , the shipwrights would rivet the planks together using wrought iron rivets and roves . ribs maintained the shape of the hull sides . each tier of planks overlapped the one below , and waterproof caulking was used between planks to create a strong but supple hull . remarkably large vessels could be constructed using traditional clinker construction . dragon-ships carrying 100 warriors were not uncommon . furthermore , during the early viking age , oar ports replaced rowlocks , allowing oars to be stored while the ship was at sail and to provide better angles for rowing . the largest ships of the era could travel five to six knots using oar power and up to ten knots under sail . richard hall , the world of the vikings ( new york , 2007 ) , 55 . . navigation . with such technological improvements , the vikings began to make more and more ocean voyages , as their ships were more seaworthy . however , in order to sail in ocean waters , the vikings needed to develop methods of relatively precise navigation . most commonly , a ship 's pilot drew on traditional knowledge to guide the ship 's path . essentially , the vikings simply used prior familiarity with tides , sailing times , and landmarks in order to route courses . for example , scholars contend that the sighting of a whale allowed the vikings to determine the direction of a ship . because whales feed in highly nutritious waters , commonly found in regions where landmasses have pushed deep-water currents towards shallower areas , the sighting of a whale functioned as a signal that land was near . on the other hand , some academics have proposed that the vikings also developed more advanced aids to navigation , such as the use of a sun compass . a wooden half-disc found on the shores of narsarsuaq , greenland initially seemed to support this hypothesis . however , further investigation of the object revealed that the slits inscribed in the disc are disproportionately spaced , and so the object could not in fact function as an accurate compass . rather it has been suggested that the instrument is instead a “ confession disc ” used by priests to count the number of confessions in their parish . hall , the world of the vikings , 54 . similarly , researchers and historians continually debate the use of the sunstone in viking navigation . because a sunstone is able to polarize light , it is a plausible method for determining direction . by showing which direction light waves are oscillating , the sunstone has the potential to show the sun 's position even when the sun is obscured by clouds . the stone changes to a certain color , based on the direction of the waves , but only when the object is held in an area with direct sunlight . thus , most scholars debate the reliability and the plausibility of using a navigational tool that can only determine direction in such limited conditions . viking sagas routinely tell of voyages where vikings suffered from being '' hafvilla '' ( bewildered ) —voyages beset by fog or bad weather , where they completely lost their sense of direction . this description suggests they did not use a sunstone when the sun was obscured . moreover , the fact that this same bewilderment could arise when the winds died suggests that the vikings relied on prevailing winds to navigate , as expected if their skills depended principally on traditional knowledge . hafvilla : a note on norse navigation , g . j . marcus , speculum , vol . 30 , no . 4 ( oct . , 1955 ) , pp . 601–05 , published by : medieval academy of america , ( accessed november 2 , 2011 ) . . culture and traditions . one viking custom was to bury dead chieftains in their ships . the dead man 's body would be carefully prepared and dressed in his best clothes . after this preparation , the body would be transported to the burial-place in a wagon drawn by horses . the man would be placed on his ship , along with many of his most prized possessions . the chieftain 's favorite horses , often a faithful hunting-dog and occasionally thralls and households , were sacrificially killed and also buried with the deceased . the vikings firmly believed that the dead man would then sail to the after-life . an example of a viking ship burial was excavated near the danish village of ladby and can be found on display here . ship burial is an ancient tradition in scandinavia , stretching back to at least the nordic iron age , as evidenced by the hjortspring boat ( 400–300 bc ) or the nydam mose ( 200–450 ad ) , for example . ships and bodies of water have held major spiritual importance in the norse cultures since at least the nordic bronze age . preserved ships . several original viking ships have been found through the ages , but only a few have been relatively intact and subsequently preserved . the most notable of these few ships include : gokstad ship : overall length – approximately oseberg ship : overall length – approximately tune ship : may have been up to 18.7 metres ( 61 & nbsp ; ft ) long skuldelev ships gjellestad ship burial : estimated length 20 metres ( excavation ongoing as of june 2020 ) . replicas . viking ship replicas are one of the more common types of ship replica . viking , the very first viking ship replica , was built by the rødsverven shipyard in sandefjord , norway . in 1893 it sailed across the atlantic ocean to chicago for the world 's columbian exposition . there are a considerable number of modern reconstructions of viking age ships in service around northern europe and north america . the viking ship museum in roskilde , denmark , has been particularly prolific in building accurate reconstructions of archaeological finds in its collection .