Cytoskeleton

history . in 1903 , nikolai koltsov proposed that the shape of cells was determined by a network of tubules that he termed the cytoskeleton . the concept of a protein mosaic that dynamically coordinated cytoplasmic biochemistry was proposed by rudolph peters in 1929 while the term ( cytosquelette , in french ) was first introduced by french embryologist paul wintrebert in 1931 . when the cytoskeleton was first introduced , it was thought to be an uninteresting gel-like substance that helped organelles stay in place . much research took place to try to understand the purpose of the cytoskeleton and its components . with the help of stuart hameroff and roger penrose , it was discovered that microtubules vibrate within neurons in the brain , suggesting that brain waves come from deeper microtubule vibrations . this discovery demonstrated that the cytoskeleton is not just a gel-like substance and that it actually has a purpose . initially , it was thought that the cytoskeleton was exclusive to eukaryotes but in 1992 it was discovered to be present in prokaryotes as well . this discovery came after the realization that bacteria possess proteins that are homologous to tubulin and actin ; the main components of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton . . eukaryotic cytoskeleton . eukaryotic cells contain three main kinds of cytoskeletal filaments : microfilaments , microtubules , and intermediate filaments . in neurons the intermediate filaments are known as neurofilaments . each type is formed by the polymerization of a distinct type of protein subunit and has its own characteristic shape and intracellular distribution . microfilaments are polymers of the protein actin and are 7 & nbsp ; nm in diameter . microtubules are composed of tubulin and are 25 & nbsp ; nm in diameter . intermediate filaments are composed of various proteins , depending on the type of cell in which they are found ; they are normally 8-12 & nbsp ; nm in diameter . the cytoskeleton provides the cell with structure and shape , and by excluding macromolecules from some of the cytosol , it adds to the level of macromolecular crowding in this compartment . cytoskeletal elements interact extensively and intimately with cellular membranes . research into neurodegeneration such as parkinson 's disease , alzheimer 's disease , huntington 's disease , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als ) indicate that the cytoskeleton is affected in these diseases . parkinson 's disease is marked by the degradation of neurons , resulting in tremors , rigidity , and other non-motor symptoms . research has shown that microtubule assembly and stability in the cytoskeleton is compromised causing the neurons to degrade over time . in alzheimer 's disease , tau proteins which stabilize microtubules malfunction in the progression of the illness causing pathology of the cytoskeleton . excess glutamine in the huntington protein involved with linking vesicles onto the cytoskeleton is also proposed to be a factor in the development of huntington 's disease . amyotrophic lateral sclerosis results in a loss of movement caused by the degradation of motor neurons , and also involves defects of the cytoskeleton . accessory proteins including motor proteins regulate and link the filaments to other cell compounds and each other and are essential for controlled assembly of cytoskeletal filaments in particular locations . a number of small-molecule cytoskeletal drugs have been discovered that interact with actin and microtubules . these compounds have proven useful in studying the cytoskeleton , and several have clinical applications . microfilaments . microfilaments , also known as actin filaments , are composed of linear polymers of g-actin proteins , and generate force when the growing ( plus ) end of the filament pushes against a barrier , such as the cell membrane . they also act as tracks for the movement of myosin molecules that affix to the microfilament and '' walk '' along them . in general , the major component or protein of microfilaments are actin . the g-actin monomer combines to form a polymer which continues to form the microfilament ( actin filament ) . these subunits then assemble into two chains that intertwine into what are called f-actin chains . myosin motoring along f-actin filaments generates contractile forces in so-called actomyosin fibers , both in muscle as well as most non-muscle cell types . actin structures are controlled by the rho family of small gtp-binding proteins such as rho itself for contractile acto-myosin filaments ( '' stress fibers '' ) , rac for lamellipodia and cdc42 for filopodia . functions include : muscle contraction cell movement intracellular transport/trafficking maintenance of eukaryote cell shape cytokinesis cytoplasmic streaming . intermediate filaments . intermediate filaments are a part of the cytoskeleton of many eukaryote cells . these filaments , averaging 10 nanometers in diameter , are more stable ( strongly bound ) than microfilaments , and heterogeneous constituents of the cytoskeleton . like actin filaments , they function in the maintenance of cell-shape by bearing tension ( microtubules , by contrast , resist compression but can also bear tension during mitosis and during the positioning of the centrosome ) . intermediate filaments organize the internal tridimensional structure of the cell , anchoring organelles and serving as structural components of the nuclear lamina . they also participate in some cell-cell and cell-matrix junctions . nuclear lamina exist in all animals and all tissues . some animals like the fruit fly do not have any cytoplasmic intermediate filaments . in those animals that express cytoplasmic intermediate filaments , these are tissue specific . keratin intermediate filaments in epithelial cells provide protection for different mechanical stresses the skin may endure . they also provide protection for organs against metabolic , oxidative , and chemical stresses . strengthening of epithelial cells with these intermediate filaments may prevent onset of apoptosis , or cell death , by reducing the probability of stress . intermediate filaments are most commonly known as the support system or “ scaffolding ” for the cell and nucleus while also playing a role in some cell functions . in combination with proteins and desmosomes , the intermediate filaments form cell-cell connections and anchor the cell-matrix junctions that are used in messaging between cells as well as vital functions of the cell . these connections allow the cell to communicate through the desmosome of multiple cells to adjust structures of the tissue based on signals from the cells environment . mutations in the if proteins have been shown to cause serious medical issues such as premature aging , desmin mutations compromising organs , alexander disease , and muscular dystrophy . different intermediate filaments are : made of vimentins . vimentin intermediate filaments are in general present in mesenchymal cells . made of keratin . keratin is present in general in epithelial cells . neurofilaments of neural cells . made of lamin , giving structural support to the nuclear envelope . made of desmin , play an important role in structural and mechanical support of muscle cells . . microtubules . microtubules are hollow cylinders about 23 & nbsp ; nm in diameter ( lumen diameter of approximately 15 & nbsp ; nm ) , most commonly comprising 13 microtubule that , in turn , are polymers of alpha and beta tubulin . they have a very dynamic behavior , binding gtp for polymerization . they are commonly organized by the centrosome . in nine triplet sets ( star-shaped ) , they form the centrioles , and in nine doublets oriented about two additional microtubules ( wheel-shaped ) , they form cilia and flagella . the latter formation is commonly referred to as a '' 9+2 '' arrangement , wherein each doublet is connected to another by the protein dynein . as both flagella and cilia are structural components of the cell , and are maintained by microtubules , they can be considered part of the cytoskeleton . there are two types of cilia : & nbsp ; motile & nbsp ; and & nbsp ; non-motile cilia . cilia are short and more numerous than flagella . the motile cilia have a rhythmic waving or beating motion compared to the non-motile cilia which receive sensory information for the cell ; processing signals from the other cells or the fluids surrounding it . additionally , the microtubules control the beating ( movement ) of the cilia and flagella . also , the dynein arms attached to the microtubules function as the molecular motors . the motion of the cilia and flagella is created by the microtubules sliding past one another , which requires atp . they play key roles in : intracellular transport ( associated with dyneins and kinesins , they transport organelles like mitochondria or vesicles ) . . the mitotic spindle . synthesis of the cell wall in plants . in addition to the roles described above , stuart hameroff and roger penrose have proposed that microtubules function in consciousness . hameroff , s . and penrose , r . physics of life reviews 2014 , 11 , 39-78 . comparison . . septins . septins are a group of the highly conserved gtp binding proteins found in eukaryotes . different septins form protein complexes with each other . these can assemble to filaments and rings . therefore , septins can be considered part of the cytoskeleton . the function of septins in cells include serving as a localized attachment site for other proteins , and preventing the diffusion of certain molecules from one cell compartment to another . in yeast cells , they build scaffolding to provide structural support during cell division and compartmentalize parts of the cell . recent research in human cells suggests that septins build cages around bacterial pathogens , immobilizing the harmful microbes and preventing them from invading other cells . . spectrin . spectrin is a cytoskeletal protein that lines the intracellular side of the plasma membrane in eukaryotic cells . spectrin forms pentagonal or hexagonal arrangements , forming a scaffolding and playing an important role in maintenance of plasma membrane integrity and cytoskeletal structure . . yeast cytoskeleton . in budding yeast ( an important model organism ) , actin forms cortical patches , actin cables , and a cytokinetic ring and the cap . cortical patches are discrete actin bodies on the membrane and are vital for endocytosis , especially the recycling of glucan synthase which is important for cell wall synthesis . actin cables are bundles of actin filaments and are involved in the transport of vesicles towards the cap ( which contains a number of different proteins to polarize cell growth ) and in the positioning of mitochondria . the cytokinesis ring forms and constricts around the site of cell division . . prokaryotic cytoskeleton . prior to the work of jones et al . , 2001 , the cell wall was believed to be the deciding factor for many bacterial cell shapes , including rods and spirals . when studied , many misshapen bacteria were found to have mutations linked to development of a cell envelope . the cytoskeleton was once thought to be a feature only of eukaryote cells , but homologues to all the major proteins of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton have been found in prokaryotes . harold erickson notes that before 1992 , only eukaryotes were believed to have cytoskeleton components . however , research in the early '90s suggested that bacteria and archaea had homologues of actin and tubulin , and that these were the basis of eukaryotic microtubules and microfilaments . although the evolutionary relationships are so distant that they are not obvious from protein sequence comparisons alone , the similarity of their three-dimensional structures and similar functions in maintaining cell shape and polarity provides strong evidence that the eukaryotic and prokaryotic cytoskeletons are truly homologous . three laboratories independently discovered that ftsz , a protein already known as a key player in bacterial cytokinesis , had the '' tubulin signature sequence '' present in all α- , β- , and γ-tubulins . however , some structures in the bacterial cytoskeleton may not have been identified as of yet . . ftsz . ftsz was the first protein of the prokaryotic cytoskeleton to be identified . like tubulin , ftsz forms filaments in the presence of guanosine triphosphate ( gtp ) , but these filaments do not group into tubules . during cell division , ftsz is the first protein to move to the division site , and is essential for recruiting other proteins that synthesize the new cell wall between the dividing cells . mreb and parm . prokaryotic actin-like proteins , such as mreb , are involved in the maintenance of cell shape . all non-spherical bacteria have genes encoding actin-like proteins , and these proteins form a helical network beneath the cell membrane that guides the proteins involved in cell wall biosynthesis . some plasmids encode a separate system that involves an actin-like protein parm . filaments of parm exhibit dynamic instability , and may partition plasmid dna into the dividing daughter cells by a mechanism analogous to that used by microtubules during eukaryotic mitosis . . crescentin . the bacterium caulobacter crescentus contains a third protein , crescentin , that is related to the intermediate filaments of eukaryotic cells . crescentin is also involved in maintaining cell shape , such as helical and vibrioid forms of bacteria , but the mechanism by which it does this is currently unclear . additionally , curvature could be described by the displacement of crescentic filaments , after the disruption of peptidoglycan synthesis . . common features and differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes . by definition , the cytoskeleton is composed of proteins that can form longitudinal arrays ( fibres ) in all organisms . these filament forming proteins have been classified into 4 classes . tubulin-like , actin-like , walker a cytoskeletal atpases ( waca-proteins ) , and intermediate filaments . tubulin-like proteins are tubulin in eukaryotes and ftsz , tubz , repx in prokaryotes . actin-like proteins are actin in eukaryotes and mreb , ftsa in prokaryotes . an example of a waca-proteins , which are mostly found in prokaryotes , is mind . examples for intermediate filaments , which have almost exclusively been found in animals ( i.e . eukaryotes ) are the lamins , keratins , vimentin , neurofilaments , and desmin . although tubulin-like proteins share some amino acid sequence similarity , their equivalence in protein-fold and the similarity in the gtp binding site is more striking . the same holds true for the actin-like proteins and their structure and atp binding domain . cytoskeletal proteins are usually correlated with cell shape , dna segregation and cell division in prokaryotes and eukaryotes . which proteins fulfill which task is very different . for example , dna segregation in all eukaryotes happens through use of tubulin , but in prokaryotes either waca proteins , actin-like or tubulin-like proteins can be used . cell division is mediated in eukaryotes by actin , but in prokaryotes usually by tubulin-like ( often ftsz-ring ) proteins and sometimes ( crenarchaeota ) escrt-iii , which in eukaryotes still has a role in the last step of division . . cytoplasmic streaming . cytoplasmic streaming , also known as cyclosis , is the active movement of a cell ’ s contents along the components of the cytoskeleton . while mainly seen in plants , all cell types use this process for transportation of waste , nutrients , and organelles to other parts of the cell . & nbsp ; plant and algae cells are generally larger than many other cells ; so cytoplasmic streaming is important in these types of cells . this is because the cell ’ s extra volume requires cytoplasmic streaming in order to move organelles throughout the entire cell . organelles move along microfilaments in the cytoskeleton driven by myosin motors binding and pushing along actin filament bundles . & nbsp ;