James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth

biography . parentage and early life . during the summer of 1648 , charles ii of england was captivated by lucy walter , who was at the hague for a short while about this time . he was only eighteen , and she is often spoken of as his first mistress , but they may have had a tryst as early as 1646 . cites gardiner , hist . of civil war , iii . 238 ; boero , istoria.di carlo ii , rome , 1863 . charles moved to the hague during 1648 , during the second english civil war , where his sister mary and his brother-in-law william ii , prince of orange , were providing more support to his father charles i ‘ s cause than his french relations . james was born in rotterdam in the netherlands on 9 april 1649 , and spent his early years in schiedam . research by hugh noel williams suggests that charles had not arrived at the hague until the middle of september 1648 – seven months before the child 's birth , but that he had met lucy in july . some voices later whispered that in the summer of 1648 lucy had been the mistress of colonel robert sidney , a younger son of the earl of leicester . williams , p . 6 when the child grew to manhood , those loyal to the duke of york ( whom the exclusionists wished to replace as heir to the throne ) publicly put about the story that they saw a semblance to sidney . these voices may have been encouraged by the duke of york himself , brother of king charles ii , who was afraid of any of the acknowledged fourteen royal bastards ’ possible claims to the throne , charles having no legitimate surviving children . in 2012 , a dna test of monmouth 's patrilineal descendant the 10th duke of buccleuch showed that he shared the same y chromosome as a distant stuart cousin ; this is evidence that charles ii was indeed monmouth 's father . monmouth had a younger sister or half-sister , mary crofts , whose father may have been lord taaffe . mary later married the irishman william sarsfield , thus becoming the sister-in-law of the jacobite general patrick sarsfield . as an illegitimate son , monmouth was ineligible to succeed to the english or scottish thrones , unless he could prove rumours that his parents had married secretly . monmouth came to maintain that his parents were married and that he possessed evidence of their marriage , but he never produced it . charles ii , as king , later testified in writing to his council that he had never been married to anyone except his queen , catherine of braganza . in march 1658 , young james crofts was kidnapped by one of the king 's men , sent to paris , and placed in the care of a john crofts ( 1635–1664 ) , whose surname he took . he briefly attended a school in familly . . officer and commander . on 14 february 1663 , at the age of 13 , shortly after having been brought to england , james was created duke of monmouth , with the subsidiary titles of earl of doncaster and baron scott of tynedale , all three in the peerage of england , and on 28 march 1663 he was appointed a order of the garter . on 20 april 1663 , just days after his 14th birthday , he was married to the heiress anne scott , 1st duchess of buccleuch . james took his wife 's surname upon marriage . the day after his marriage , the couple were made duke of buccleuch , earl and countess of dalkeith , and lord and lady scott of whitchester and eskdale in the peerage of scotland . monmouth , as he became known , was popular , particularly for his protestantism , whereas the official heir presumptive to the throne , the king 's brother james , duke of york , had openly converted to catholic church . in 1665 , at the age of 16 , monmouth served in the royal navy under his uncle , the duke of york in the second anglo-dutch war . in june 1666 , he returned to england to become captain of a troop of cavalry . on 16 september 1668 he was made colonel of the 1st troop of horse guards . he acquired moor park in hertfordshire in april 1670 . at the outbreak of the third anglo-dutch war in 1672 , a brigade of 6,000 english and scottish troops was sent to serve as part of the french army ( in return for money paid to king charles ) , with monmouth as its commander . he became lord lieutenant of the east riding of yorkshire and governor of kingston-upon-hull in april 1673 . in the campaign of 1673 and in particular at the siege of maastricht that june , monmouth gained a considerable reputation as one of britain 's finest soldiers . he was reported to be replacing marshal schomberg as commander of england 's zealand expedition , but this did not happen . watson p.67-68 in 1674 , monmouth became chancellor of cambridge university and master of the horse , and king charles ii directed that all military orders should be brought first to monmouth for examination , thus giving him effective command of the forces ; his responsibilities included the movement of troops and the suppression of riots . in march 1677 , he also became lord lieutenant of staffordshire . . claim to the crown . in 1678 , monmouth was the commander of the anglo-dutch brigade , now fighting for the dutch republic against the french , and he distinguished himself at the battle of saint-denis in august that year during the franco-dutch war , further increasing his reputation . the following year , after his return to britain , he commanded the small army raised to put down the rebellion of the scottish covenanters and despite being heavily outnumbered , he decisively defeated the ( admittedly poorly equipped ) covenanter rebels at the battle of bothwell bridge on 22 june 1679 . . rebellion . as his popularity with the masses increased , monmouth was obliged to go into exile in the dutch dutch republic in september 1679 . following the discovery of the so-called rye house plot in 1683 , which aimed to assassinate both charles ii and his brother james , monmouth , who had been encouraged by his supporters to assert his right to the throne , was identified as a conspirator . on king charles ii 's death in february 1685 , monmouth led the monmouth rebellion , landing with three ships at lyme regis in dorset in early june 1685 , in an attempt to take the throne from his uncle , james ii and vii . he published a '' declaration for the defence and vindication of the protestant religion and of the laws , rights and privileges of england from the invasion made upon them , and for delivering the kingdom from the usurpation and tyranny of us by the name of james , duke of york '' : king james ii and vii responded to this by issuing an order for the publishers and distributors of the paper to be arrested . monmouth declared himself as the rightful king at various places along the route including axminster , chard , ilminster and taunton . the two armies met at the battle of sedgemoor on 6 july 1685 , the last clear-cut pitched battle on open ground between two military forces fought on english soil : monmouth 's makeshift force could not compete with the regular army , and was soundly defeated . . capture . following the battle a reward of £5,000 was offered for his capture . roberts , p . 109 on 8 july 1685 , monmouth was captured and arrested near ringwood in hampshire , by tradition '' in a field of peas '' . the events surrounding his capture are recorded in detail in tait 's edinburgh magazine . tait 's edinburgh magazine , volume 12 , january 1845 , p.57 , ed . william tait , christian isobel johnstone when the duke had left his horse at woodyates inn , he exchanged clothes with a shepherd , who was soon discovered by local loyalists and interrogated . dogs were then put onto the duke 's scent . monmouth dropped his gold snuff-box , full of gold pieces , in a pea-field , where it was afterwards found . from woodyates inn the duke had gone to shag 's heath , in the middle of which was a cluster of small farms , called the '' island '' . amy farrant gave information that the fugitives were concealed within the island . the duke , accompanied by busse and brandenburgher , remained concealed all day , with soldiers surrounding the area and threatening to set fire to the woodland . brandenburgher deserted him at 1 am , and was later captured and interrogated , and is believed to have given away the duke 's hiding place . the spot was at the north-eastern extremity of the island , now known as monmouth 's close , in the manor of woodlands , the property of the earl of shaftesbury . at about 7 am henry parkin , a militia-soldier and servant of samuel rolle , discovered the brown skirt of monmouth 's coat as he lay hidden in a ditch covered with fern and brambles under an ash tree , and called for help . the duke was seized . bystanders shouted out '' shoot him ! shoot him ! '' , but sir william portman happening to be near the spot , immediately rode up , and laid hands on him as his prisoner . monmouth was then '' in the last extremity of hunger and fatigue , with no sustenance but a few raw peas in his pocket . he could not stand , and his appearance was much changed . since landing in england , the duke had not had a good night 's rest , or eaten one meal in quiet , being perpetually agitated with the cares that attend unfortunate ambition '' . he had '' received no other sustenance than the brook and the field afforded '' . tait 's edinburgh magazine the duke was taken to holt lodge , in the parish of wimborne , about a mile away , the residence of anthony etterick , a magistrate who asked the duke what he would do if released , to which he answered '' that if his horse and arms were but restored to him at the same time , he needed only to ride through the army ; and he defied them to take him again '' . the magistrate ordered him taken to london . . attainder and execution . following monmouth 's capture , parliament passed an act of attainder , 1 ja . ii c . 2 : raithby , p.2 the king took the unusual step of allowing his nephew an audience , despite having no intention of extending a pardon to him , thus breaking with a longstanding tradition that the king would give an audience only when he intended to show clemency . the prisoner unsuccessfully implored his mercy , and even offered to convert to catholicism , but to no avail . the king , disgusted by his abject behaviour , coldly told him to prepare to die , and later remarked that monmouth '' did not behave as well as i expected '' . numerous pleas for mercy were addressed to the king , but he ignored them all , even that of his sister-in-law , the catherine of braganza . beatty , p . 60 monmouth was beheaded by jack ketch on 15 july 1685 , on tower hill . shortly beforehand , bishops turner of ely and ken of bath and wells visited the duke to prepare him for eternity , but withheld the eucharist , for the condemned man refused to acknowledge that either his rebellion or his relationship with lady wentworth had been sinful . macaulay , p.491 it is said that before laying his head on the block , monmouth specifically bade ketch finish him at one blow , saying he had mauled others before . disconcerted , ketch did indeed inflict multiple blows with his axe , the prisoner rising up reproachfully the while – a ghastly sight that shocked the witnesses , drawing forth execrations and groans . some say a knife was at last employed to sever the head from the twitching body . sources vary ; some claim eight blows , the official tower of london fact sheet says it took five blows , while charles spencer , in his book blenheim , puts it at seven . spencer , p.54 : '' monmouth had a particularly grisly end , the executioner 's axe striking seven times before his head severed '' his execution was alluded to in the film kind hearts and coronets , where the executioner says '' the last execution of a duke in this country was very badly botched . but that was in the days of the axe . '' monmouth was buried in the church of st peter ad vincula in the tower of london . his dukedom was forfeited , but his subsidiary titles , earl of doncaster and baron scott of tindale , were restored by king george ii on 23 march 1743 to his grandson francis scott , 2nd duke of buccleuch ( 1695–1751 ) . . popular legends . according to legend , a portrait was painted of monmouth after his execution : the tradition states that it was realised after the execution that there was no official portrait of the duke , so his body was exhumed , the head stitched back on , and it was sat for its portrait to be painted . however , there are at least two formal portraits of monmouth tentatively dated to before his death currently in the national portrait gallery in london , and another painting once identified with monmouth that shows a sleeping or dead man that could have given rise to the story . one of the many theories about the identity of man in the iron mask is that he was monmouth : this seems to be based on the unlikely reasoning that james ii would not execute his own nephew , so someone else was executed , and james ii arranged for monmouth to be taken to france and put in the custody of his cousin louis xiv of france . shaw , samuel , '' duke of monmouth : man in the iron mask '' in oxford journals ( oxford , 1870 ) vol s4-v , no 120 . henry purcell set to music ( z . 481 ) a satirical poem by an unidentified author , ridiculing monmouth and his parentage : a grasshopper and a fly , in summer hot and dry , in eager argument were met about priority . says the fly to the grasshopper : '' from mighty race i spring , bright phoebus was my dad 't is known , and i eat and drink with a king . '' says the grasshopper to the fly : '' such rogues are still preferr 'd ; your father might be of high degree , but your mother was but a turd . '' so , rebel jemmy scott , that did to the empire soar , his father might be the lord knows what , but his mother we knew a whore '' . children . his marriage to anne scott , 1st duchess of buccleuch resulted in the birth of six children : charles scott , earl of doncaster ( 24 august 1672 – 9 february 1673/1674 ) james scott , earl of dalkeith ( 23 may 1674 – 14 march 1705 ) . he was married on 2 january 1693/1694 to henrietta hyde , daughter of laurence hyde , 1st earl of rochester . they were parents to francis scott , 2nd duke of buccleuch . lady anne scott ( 17 february 1675 – 13 august 1685 ) henry scott , 1st earl of deloraine ( 1676 – 25 december 1730 ) francis scott ( died an infant ; buried 8 december 1679 ) lady charlotte scott ( died an infant ; buried 5 september 1683 ) his affair with his mistress eleanor needham , daughter of sir robert needham of lambeth resulted in the birth of three children : james crofts ( died march 1732 ) , major-general in the army . henrietta crofts – 27 february 1730 ) . she was married around 1697 to charles paulet , 2nd duke of bolton . isabel crofts ( died young ) toward the end of his life he conducted an affair with henrietta , baroness wentworth . . family tree . . references . sources . watson , j.n.p . captain general and rebel chief : the life of james , duke of monmouth . george allen & unwin , 1979 . . further reading . - - - - -