Proton (rocket family)

history . proton started its life as a '' super heavy icbm '' . it was designed to launch a 100-megaton ( or larger ) thermonuclear weapon over a distance of 13,000 & nbsp ; km . it was hugely oversized for an icbm and was never deployed in such a capacity . it was eventually used as a space launch vehicle . it was the brainchild of vladimir chelomei 's design bureau as a foil to sergei korolev 's n1 rocket , whose purpose was to send a two-man zond spacecraft around the moon ; korolev openly opposed proton and chelomei 's other designs for their use of toxic propellants . the unusual appearance of the first stage results from the need to transport components by rail . the central oxidizer tank is the maximum width for the loading gauge of the track . the six tanks surrounding it carry fuel and serve as the attachment points for the engines . despite resembling strap-on boosters , they are not designed to separate from the central oxidizer tank . the first and second stages are connected by a lattice structure . the second stage engine ignites shortly before separation of the first stage and the lattice allows the exhaust to escape . the first stage of the proton rocket at russian space web a rushed development program led to dozens of failures between 1965 and 1972 . proton did not complete its state trials until 1977 , at which point it was judged to have a higher than 90 % reliability . proton 's design was kept secret until 1986 , with the public being only shown the upper stages in film clips and photographs , and the first time the complete vehicle was shown to the outside world happened during the televised launch of mir . mass-production of guidance , navigation and control system for proton has begun in 1964 on '' communard '' industrial association ( kharkov , ukraine ) . proton launched the uncrewed soviet circumlunar flights and was intended to have launched the first crewed soviet circumlunar spaceflights , before the united states flew the apollo 8 mission . proton launched the salyut space stations , the mir core segment and expansion modules , and both the zarya and zvezda modules of the iss . proton also launches commercial satellites , most of them being managed by international launch services . the first ils proton launch was on 9 april 1996 with the launch of the ses astra 1f communications satellite . between 1994 and mid-2010 , proton revenues were 4.3 & nbsp ; billion , and were projected to grow to 6 & nbsp ; billion by 2011 . statement by vladimir ye . nesterov , khrunichev director-general , at press conference on 15 july 2010 khruhichev 29 july 2010 . in january 2017 , the proton was temporarily grounded due to the manufacturer , voronezh mechanical plant , having substituted a heat-resistant alloy in the engines with a cheaper metal . in june 2018 , the state corporation roscosmos announced that the proton rocket would cease production as the new angara launch vehicle comes on line and becomes operational . no new launch service contracts for proton are likely to be signed . proton flew its last scheduled commercial mission on 9 october 2019 , delivering eutelsat 5 west b and mission extension vehicle-1 to geostationary orbit . a number of roscosmos and other russian government missions remain on proton launch manifest . proton 8k82k . the ( grau index ) 8k82k version is now usually called '' proton k '' . it is fuelled by very toxic udmh and nitrogen tetroxide . these are hypergolic fuels which ignite on contact , avoiding the need for an ignition system , and can be stored at ambient temperatures . this avoids the need for components that are tolerant of low temperatures , and allows the rocket to remain on the pad indefinitely ( other launchers with such capability include the u.s . titan ii glv , titan iii , and titan iv , the chinese long march 2 and long march 4 , the soviet/ukrainian tsyklon launchers , the soviet/russian kosmos-3 and kosmos-3m launchers and the european ariane 1 to ariane 4 launchers ) . in contrast , cryogenic fuels need periodic replenishment as they boil off . the fourth stage has multiple variants , depending on the mission . the simplest , blok d , was used for interplanetary missions . blok d had no guidance module , depending on the probe to control flight . three different blok dm versions ( dm , dm2 , and dm-2m ) were for high earth orbits . the blok d/dm were unusual in that the fuel was stored in a toroidal tank , around the engine and behind the oxidizer tank . the initial proton tests in 1965–66 only used the first two stages of the booster , the complete four-stage vehicle being flown for the first time in 1967 . when the soviet space station program began in 1971 , protons began being flown with the blok d removed for use as a heavy-lift leo launcher . proton-k payloads included all of the soviet union 's salyut space stations , almost all mir modules ( with the exception of the docking module , which was launched on the united states space shuttle ) , and the zarya and zvezda modules of the international space station . it was intended to launch the crewed tks spacecraft , prior to the cancellation of that programme , although a few robotic flights of spacecraft were fulfilled . in addition it was intended to launch the 1970s lks spaceplane that was never realised . proton-m . the initial version of proton m , could launch into geostationary orbit or into a geostationary transfer orbit . it could place up to in low earth orbit with a 51.6-degree inclination , the orbit of the international space station ( iss ) . the proton m 's improvements included lower stage modifications to reduce structural mass , increase thrust , and fully use propellants . generally a briz-m meaning breeze ) storable propellant upper stage is used instead of the blok d or blok dm stage , removing the need for multiple fuel supplies and oxygen top-off due to boiling ; the proton-m also flew with a blok-dm upper stage . efforts were also made to reduce dependency on foreign ( usually ukrainian ) component suppliers . with the briz-m upper stage , the payload fairing diameter is 4.1 m ( 13.45 ft ) . proton launch vehicles and briz-m upper stages are designed and built by khrunichev state research and production space center ( khrunichev ) in moscow , the majority owner of international launch services ( ils ) . the center is home to all engineering , assembly and test functions of proton production . with the recent consolidation of the russian space enterprises , khrunichev has direct oversight and control of up to 70 % of all proton manufacturing from suppliers to manufacturers . the consolidation directly supports khrunichev 's ongoing efforts for vertical integration of proton production . an enhanced variant , the phase iii proton-m/briz-m launch vehicle , was flight proven on the russian federal dual mission of express am-44 and express md-1 in february 2009 and performed its first commercial launch in march 2010 with the echostar xiv satellite . the proton-m/briz-m phase iii configuration provides 6150 & nbsp ; kg of gto performance , an increase of 1150 & nbsp ; kg over the original proton-m briz-m , while maintaining the fundamental design configuration . on 6 august 2012 , the russian federal space agency lost a russian and an indonesian communications satellite in an attempt to launch them into orbit on a proton-m due to technical difficulties with the last stage . on 2 july 2013 , a proton-m launching three glonass navigation satellites experienced a failure reminiscent of the 1960s disasters shortly after liftoff when the booster crashed near lc-39 at baikonour , ending a 30-year unbroken stretch without a first stage failure ; all future proton flights were suspended pending investigation . the accident was eventually determined to be caused by the rate gyro package having been installed upside-down . due to the difficulty of installing the package incorrectly , it was widely suspected that it had been done deliberately by a disgruntled or drunk worker at the khrunichev plant . on 15 may 2014 , a proton-m/briz-m carrying an ekspress satellite suffered a third stage failure from a bad turbopump bearing . debris fell in manchuria . on 21 october , another ekspress satellite was left in a useless orbit when the briz stage cut off 24 seconds too early . on 16 may 2015 , a mexsat communications satellite failed to orbit due to another third stage malfunction , the eighth proton failure since 2010 . khrunichev has initiated development of a set of phase iv enhancements in order to keep pace with market demands and the mass growth trends of commercial satellites . the implementation of phase iv proton briz-m enhancements were completed in 2016 . the payload mass performance for phase iv has been increased to 6320 & nbsp ; kg to a reference gto orbit with 1500 & nbsp ; m/s of residual delta v to gso . . launches . future developments . significant upgrades were temporarily put on hold following announcement ( in 1992 ) of the new angara launch vehicle . the single largest upgrade was the kvrb stage . this cryogenic stage would have greatly increased capacity . the engine was developed successfully , and the stage as a whole had progressed to hardware . however , as kvrb is noticeably larger than block d , the vehicle 's aerodynamics , flight control , software , and possibly electronics would have to be reevaluated . in addition , the launch pad can supply existing protons with common hypergolic fuels from single sources . the upper stages , in particular , are fed by common loading pipes running along the rocket . switching to a stage with different fuels requires the addition of extra support articles ; switching to cryogens requires that such support articles top off the stage periodically . heavy variants of angara will be simpler and cheaper than proton ( and like the atlas v rocket , will not use hypergolic fuels ; instead , it will use the same rp-1 fuel as that used on the soyuz rocket ) . they will also be designed from the start to accept a kvtk stage , and will already have a lox supply at the pad ; only a hydrogen supply will be called upon . see also . comparison of orbital launchers families comparison of orbital launch systems . similar launch systems . delta iv atlas v ariane 5 long march 5 angara a5 falcon 9 h-iib saturn i and ib heavy-lift launch vehicle . references . external links . proton launches page on lyngsat proton rocket specifications sheet proton m debuts with successful ekran launch on april 7 , 2001 proton 8k82k / briz-m . astronautix . fas – proton launch vehicle ils proton proton launch schedules on satlaunch слабое звено – '' бриз-м ''