The Raincoats

history . 1977–1993 . da silva and birch were inspired to make a band after they saw the slits perform live earlier that year . birch stated in an interview with she shreds magazine , '' it was as if suddenly i was given permission . it never occurred to me that i could be in a band . girls didn ’ t do that . but when i saw the slits doing it , i thought , ‘ this is me . this is mine . ’ ” for the band 's first concert on 9 november 1977 at the tabernacle , the line-up included birch , da silva , ross crighton ( guitar ) and nick turner ( drums ) . kate korus ( from the slits and later the mo-dettes ) joined briefly but was replaced by jeremie franko . nick turner left to form the barracudas , and richard dudanski ( ex-the 101ers and later public image ltd . ) sat in on drums , while filmmaker patrick keiller replaced franko on guitar . late in 1978 , the raincoats became an all female band as they were joined by the slits ' ex-drummer palmolive and the classically trained violinist vicky aspinall , with this line-up making their live debut at acklam hall in london on 4 january 1979 . ian penman : the raincoats dresden banks vincent units acklam hall . in : new musical express 27 january 1979 , page 43 . managed by shirley o'loughlin , the band went on their first uk tour with swiss female band kleenex , in may 1979 after rough trade records released their first single , '' fairytale in the supermarket '' . johnny rotten was an early admirer of the band , and later stated : '' the raincoats offered a completely different way of doing things , as did x-ray spex and all the books about punk have failed to realise that these women were involved for no other reason than that they were good and original '' . the raincoats ' distinctly uncommercial sound did not appeal to everyone ; after witnessing an early performance by the band , danny baker remarked that '' they are so bad that every time a waiter drops a tray we 'd all get up and dance '' . on 21 november 1979 , rough trade released the band 's self-titled debut album , stuart murdoch : my top 10 albums observer.guardian.co.uk – retrieved : 28 july 2007 which received considerable acclaim from the press . palmolive had left the band in september , shortly before the raincoats came out , and teenager ingrid weiss joined the band on drums . the raincoats ' second album , odyshape , was released in 1981 and featured weiss as well as drumming contributions from dudanski , robert wyatt ( the soft machine ) and charles hayward ( this heat ) . the raincoats employed a diverse selection of cheap second-hand instruments such as the balophone , kalimba and gamelan on odyshape , and the album incorporated british folk , dub basslines , polyrhythmic percussion and elements of free jazz among other world music influences . its eclectic mix of musical genres has been described as one of the '' great lost moments of women-in-rock '' . '' the basic theme in rock ' n'roll is what goes on between men and women.rock ' n'roll is based on black music . and it 's based in the exclusion of women and the ghettoization of blacks . which is why we want to put a bit of distance between what we do and the rock ' n'roll tradition . '' — the raincoats interviewed by greil marcus in december 1982 , the raincoats recorded a live album at the kitchen arts space in new york . the kitchen tapes was released on cassette by roir in 1983 . the kitchen tapes roir-usa.com – retrieved : 28 july 2007 the raincoats recorded moving in 1984 . tired of constant touring and '' pulling in different musical directions '' , the band members began work on solo projects shortly after the album 's release . birch and aspinall formed dorothy , while da silva worked with choreographer gaby agis on a series of dance projects and formed roseland with hayward . in 1992 , kurt cobain of nirvana went into the rough trade shop in talbot road , london in search of a new copy of the raincoats , and jude crighton sent him around the corner to see da silva at her cousin 's antique shop . cobain wrote passionately about this meeting in the liner notes of nirvana 's incesticide album . in late 1993 , rough trade and dgc records reissued the band 's three studio albums , with liner notes by cobain and sonic youth 's kim gordon . '' i do n't really know anything about the raincoats except that they recorded some music that has affected me so much that , whenever i hear it i 'm reminded of a particular time in my life when i was ( shall we say ) extremely unhappy , lonely , and bored . if it were n't for the luxury of putting that scratchy copy of the raincoats ' first record , i would have had very few moments of peace . i suppose i could have researched a bit of history about the band but i feel it 's more important to delineated the way i feel and how they sound . when i listen to the raincoats i feel as if i 'm a stowaway in an attic , violating and in the dark . rather than listening to them i feel like i 'm listening in on them . we 're together in the same old house and i have to be completely still or they will hear me spying from above and , if i get caught – everything will be ruined because it 's their thing . '' — cobain 's liner notes for the raincoats '' i loved the slits because of their boldness and that they actually had commercial songs , but it was the raincoats i related to most . they seemed like ordinary people playing extraordinary music . they had enough confidence to be vulnerable and to be themselves without having to take on the mantle of male rock/punk rock aggression.or the typical female as sex symbol avec irony or sensationalism . '' — gordon 's liner notes for odyshape later , cobain listed the raincoats debut album at no . 20 in his 50 favorite albums . . 1994–present . o'loughlin persuaded birch and da silva to play a show at the garage in london in march 1994 with steve shelley ( sonic youth ) on drums and anne wood on violin to celebrate the album re-releases . they recorded a session for bbc radio 1 's john peel , which was released as extended play on paul smith 's blast first and shelley 's label smells like records . cobain invited them to play on nirvana 's planned uk tour in april , but he died a week before the tour began . the raincoats released looking in the shadows on rough trade/geffen in 1996 , produced by britpop producer ed buller ( who had previously worked with suede and pulp ) . musicians included wood ( violin , bass ) , heather dunn ( drums ) and pete shelley ( buzzcocks ) . in 1995 , the tim/kerr label released a raincoats compilation , fairytales . since 1996 , the raincoats have played some special events such as wyatt 's meltdown in 2001 , and chicks on speed 's 99 cents album release party in berlin in december 2003 . birch and da silva recorded a cover version of '' monk chant '' for a tribute album of monks songs called silver monk time , and performed the song live with the monks at berlin 's volksbühne in october 2006 . they played at ladyfest in leeds in april 2007 , and the nuits sonores festival in lyon on 18 may 2007 . on 28 march 2009 , the raincoats-fairytales-a work in progress , directed by birch and produced by the raincoats , was screened at the british film institute in london . on 25 april , the band performed at donaufestival in austria . on 9 november 2009 , the raincoats ' debut album was reissued on vinyl on we three ( the band 's own label ) in the uk and on the kill rock stars label in the u.s . the band performed at matt groening 's all tomorrow 's parties festival in may 2010 at minehead in somerset . the following week , the raincoats played their debut album live for an atp do n't look back concert at london 's scala , supported by the raincoats-influenced band trash kit . on 21 november 2010 , the raincoats performed a concert as part of the poprally series at moma in new york city . the band were invited by jeff mangum of neutral milk hotel to perform their debut album live at the all tomorrow 's parties festival in march 2012 . in december 2011 , it was announced that the raincoats would also appear at the 35 denton music festival in texas the same month . the raincoats invited angel olsen to collaborate for the 40th anniversary of rough trade at london 's islington assembly hall on 3 november 2016 . on 5 october 2017 , jenn pelly 's 33⅓ book the raincoats , about the band 's first album , was published by bloomsbury . discography . chart placings shown are from the uk indie chart . lazell , barry ( 1997 ) indie hits 1980 – 1989 , cherry red books , . studio albums . the raincoats ( 1979 , rough trade ) no . 5 odyshape ( 1981 , rough trade ) no . 5 moving ( 1984 , rough trade ) no . 5 looking in the shadows ( 1996 , rough trade/geffen ) . singles and eps . '' fairytale in the supermarket '' 7 '' single ( 1979 , rough trade ) '' running away '' 7 '' single ( 1982 , rough trade ) no . 47 '' animal rhapsody '' 12 '' single ( 1983 , rough trade ) extended play ep ( 1994 , blast first/smells like ) '' do n't be mean '' 7 '' /cd single ( 1995 , rough trade ) . live albums . the kitchen tapes ( 1983 , roir ) . compilation albums . fairytales ( 1995 , tim/kerr ) . compilation appearances . '' in love '' on wan na buy a bridge ? ( 1980 , rough trade ) '' shouting out loud '' on c81 ( 1981 , rough trade/new musical express ) '' no one 's little girl '' on ( thanks to rough trade for ) a constant source of interruption ( 1990 , rough trade ) '' in love '' on lipstick traces ( 1993 , rough trade ) '' off duty trip '' on totally wired ( 1995 , razor and tie ) '' in love '' on upsalapalooza ( 1995 , wfmu ) '' shouting out loud '' on seething-id , a blast first complication ( 1995 , blast first ) '' no one 's little girl '' on postpunk chronicles : left of the dial ( 1999 , rhino ) '' fairytale in the supermarket '' on rough trade shops – 25 years ( 2001 , mute ) '' lola '' the kinks cover on rough trade shops post punk 01 ( 2003 , mute ) '' animal rhapsody ( version ) '' on dj-kicks : chicken lips ( 2003 , ! k7 ) '' fairytale in the supermarket '' on left of the dial : dispatches from the '80s underground ( 2004 , rhino ) '' only loved at night '' on rip it up and start again – postpunk 1978–1984 ( 2006 , v2 ) '' monk chant '' the monks cover on silver monk time ( 2006 , play loud ! productions ) '' shouting out loud '' on girl monster ( 2006 , chicks on speed ) '' honey mad woman '' on roir post punk compilation ( 2012 , roir ) '' shouting out loud '' on death disco ( mojo presents a compendium of post-punk grooves ) ( 2014 , mojo ) '' shouting out loud '' on recorded at the automat : the best of rough trade records ( 2015 , rough trade ) '' lola '' the kinks cover on rough trade shops – covers vol . 1 ( 2016 , rough trade ) '' fairytale in the supermarket '' on 20th century women ( 2017 , rhino ) . notes . guardian online review of book relating to female punk musicians/groups including gina birch and ana da silva . further reading . interview with gina birch . external links . the raincoats official web site