Geneva Bible

history . the geneva bible followed the great bible of 1539 , the first authorised bible in english , which was the authorized bible of the church of england . during the reign of queen mary i of england ( 1553–58 ) , a number of protestant scholars fled from england to geneva , switzerland , which was then ruled as a republic in which john calvin and , later , theodore beza , provided the primary spiritual and theological leadership . among these scholars was william whittingham , who supervised the translation now known as the geneva bible , in collaboration with myles coverdale , christopher goodman , anthony gilby , thomas sampson , and william cole ; several of this group later became prominent figures in the vestments controversy . whittingham was directly responsible for the new testament , which was complete and published in 1557 , . while gilby oversaw the old testament . the first full edition of this bible , with a further revised new testament , appeared in 1560 , but it was not printed in england until 1575 ( new testament ) and 1576 ( complete bible ) . over 150 editions were issued ; the last probably in 1644 . the first bible printed in scotland was a geneva bible , which was first issued in 1579 . in fact , the involvement of knox ( 1514-1572 ) and calvin ( 1509-1564 ) in the creation of the geneva bible made it especially appealing in scotland , where a law was passed in 1579 requiring every household of sufficient means to buy a copy . . some editions from 1576 onwards included laurence tomson 's revisions of the new testament . some editions from 1599 onwards used a new '' junius '' version of the book of revelation , in which the notes were translated from a new latin commentary by franciscus junius . the annotations which are an important part of the geneva bible were calvinism and puritan in character , and as such they were disliked by the ruling pro-government anglicans of the church of england , as well as king james i , who commissioned the '' authorized version '' , or king james bible , in order to replace it . the geneva bible had also motivated the earlier production of the bishops ' bible under elizabeth i , for the same reason , and the later rheims-douai edition by the recusancy . the geneva bible remained popular among puritans and remained in widespread use until after the english civil war . the geneva notes were surprisingly included in a few editions of the king james version , even as late as 1715 . . translation . like most english translations of the time , the geneva bible was translated from scholarly editions of the greek new testament and the hebrew scriptures that comprise the old testament . the english rendering was substantially based on the earlier translations by william tyndale and myles coverdale ( the genevan bible relies significantly upon tyndale ) . daniell , david ( 2003 ) the bible in english : history and influence . new haven and london : yale university press , p . 300 and see the wikipedia article for david daniell however , the geneva bible was the first english version in which all of the old testament was translated directly from the hebrew ( cf . coverdale bible , matthew bible ) . format . the geneva bible was the first english bible to use verse numbers based on the work of stephanus ( robert estienne of paris , by this point living in geneva ) . it also had an elaborate system of commentary in marginal glosses . this annotation was done by laurence tomson , who translated ( for the 1560 geneva bible ) l'oiseleur 's notes on the gospels , which themselves came from camerarius . in 1576 tomson added l'oiseleur 's notes for the epistles , which came from beza 's greek and latin edition of the bible ( 1565 and later ) . beginning in 1599 franciscus junius ' notes on revelation were added , replacing the original notes deriving from john bale and heinrich bullinger . bale 's the image of both churches had a great effect on these notes as well as foxe 's book of martyrs . both the junius and bullinger-bale annotations are explicitly anti-roman catholic and representative of much popular protestant apocalypticism during the reformation . the 1560 geneva bible was printed in roman type—the style of type regularly used today—but many editions used the older blackletter ( '' gothic '' ) type . of the various later english bible translations , the next to use roman type was the douay-rheims bible of 1582 ( new testament ) and 1609–10 ( old testament ) . the geneva bible was also issued in more convenient and affordable sizes than earlier versions . the 1560 bible was in quarto format ( 218 & times ; 139 & nbsp ; mm type area ) , but pocketable octavo editions were also issued , and a few large folio editions . the new testament was issued at various times in sizes from quarto down to 32º ( the smallest , 70×39 & nbsp ; mm type area ) . in the late 16th century it is likely that the geneva new testament cost less than a week 's wages even for the lowest-paid labourers . the 1560 geneva bible contained a number of study aids , including woodcut illustrations , maps and explanatory 'tables ' , i.e . indexes of names and topics , in addition to the famous marginal notes . each book was preceded by an 'argument ' or introduction , and each chapter by a list of contents giving verse numbers . smaller-format editions might be unillustrated and lack the marginal notes , but some large folio editions had additional illustrations , such as one showing adam and eve , where adam wears a typical elizabethan beard and moustache . breeches bible . one interesting variation of the geneva bible is the so-called '' breeches bible '' , the first of which appeared in 1579 . in the breeches bible , genesis chapter iii verse 7 reads : '' then the eies of them both were opened , and they knew that they were naked , and they sewed figge tree leaves together , and made themselves breeches . '' in the king james version of 1611 , '' breeches '' was changed to '' aprons '' . geneva bibles with the '' breeches '' passage continued to be printed well into the time of the king james bible of 1611 . modern spelling version of the 1599 geneva bible . in 2006 , tolle lege press released a version of the 1599 geneva bible with modernised spelling , as part of their 1599 geneva bible restoration project . . the original cross references were retained as well as the study notes by the reformation leaders . in addition , the early modern english glossary was included in the updated version . the advisory board of the restoration project included several protestant christian leaders and scholars . . geneva bible v . king james version sample comparisons . to compare the geneva bible with the king james , here is in both versions ( with spelling modernized ) . the differences have been italicized ( in both extracts ) : geneva bible : and i beheld when he had opened the sixth seal , and lo , there was a great earthquake , and the sun was as black as sackcloth of hair , and the moon was like blood . and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth , as a fig tree casteth her green figs , when it is shaken of a mighty wind . and heaven departed away , as a scroll , when it is rolled , and every mountain and isle were moved out of their places . and the kings of the earth , and the great men , and the rich men , and the chief captains , and the mighty men , and every bondman , and every free man , hid themselves in dens , and among the rocks of the mountains , and said to the mountains and rocks , fall on us , and hide us from the presence of him that sitteth on the throne , and from the wrath of the lamb . for the great day of his wrath is come , and who can stand ? king james bible : and i beheld when he had opened the sixth seal , and , lo , there was a great earthquake ; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair , and the moon became as blood ; and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth , even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs , when she is shaken of a mighty wind . and the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together ; and every mountain and island was moved out of their places . and the kings of the earth , and the great men , and the rich men , and the chief captains , and the mighty men , and every bondman , and every free man , hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains ; and said to the mountains and rocks , fall on us , and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne and from the wrath of the lamb ; for the great day of his wrath is come ; and who shall be able to stand ? here are both the geneva and the king james versions of with spellings as in their originals ( not modernized ) : geneva bible : then the eies of them both were opened , and they knew that they were naked , and they sewed figge tree leaves together , and made themselves breeches . king james bible : then the eyes of them both were opened , and they knew that they were naked , and they sewed figge tree leaves together , and made themselves aprons . image : genevabible.png thumb upright the title page of the 1560 edition of the geneva bible ; the illustration depicts the israelites before the red sea . the two versions are very similar to each other . examination of the differences shows that the earlier geneva version is often more direct and modern in style than the later king james , e.g . “ and the moon was like blood ” ( geneva ) versus “ and the moon became as blood ” ( king james ) “ as a fig tree casteth her green figs ” ( geneva ) versus “ even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs ” ( king james ) by and large , the difference is that the kjv lacked footnotes that the geneva bible contained . the kjv does use the serial comma . as can be seen by the text below , daniel chapter 4 in the geneva bible appears to have removed two verses . in reality , the geneva bible places those two verses at the end of chapter 3 , as the hebrew , greek , and latin versions all did . it was not until the king james version that those verses were placed with chapter 4 as opposed to chapter 3 : . king james i and the geneva bible . image : geneva bible gothic.jpg thumb left example of the blackletter version ( 1608 ) in 1604 , the year after he claimed the throne of england in 1603 , king james i hosted and presided over a conference pertaining to matters religious , the hampton court conference . while the geneva bible was the preferred bible of anglican and puritan protestants during the elizabethan age , king james i disliked the geneva bible and made his views clearly known at the conference : '' i think that of all english bibles , that of geneva is the worst . '' apparently , his distaste for the geneva bible was not necessarily caused just by the translation of the text into english , but mostly the annotations in the margins . he felt strongly many of the annotations were '' very partial , untrue , seditious , and savoring too much of dangerous and traitorous conceits . '' in all likelihood , he saw the geneva 's interpretations of biblical passages as anti-clerical '' republicanism '' , which could imply church hierarchy was unnecessary . other passages appeared particularly seditious : notably references to monarchs as '' tyrants '' . it followed that the need for a king as head of church and state could be questioned also . james had been dealing with similar issues with the presbyterian-calvinist religious leaders back in scotland , and he wanted none of the same controversies in england . also , if annotations were in print , readers might believe these interpretations correct and fixed , making it more difficult to change his subjects ' minds about the meanings of particular passages . so when towards the end of the conference two puritans suggested that a new translation of the bible be produced to unify better the anglican church in england and scotland , james embraced the idea . he could not only be rid of those inconvenient annotations , but he could have greater influence on the translation of the bible as a whole . he commissioned and chartered a new translation of the bible which would eventually become the most famous version of the bible in the history of the english language . officially known as the authorized version to be read in churches , the new bible would come to bear his name as the so-called king james bible or king james version ( kjv ) elsewhere or casually . the first and early editions of the king james bible from 1611 and the first few decades thereafter lack annotations , unlike nearly all editions of the geneva bible up until that time . initially , the king james version did not sell well and competed with the geneva bible . shortly after the first edition of the kjv , king james banned the printing of new editions of the geneva bible to further entrench his version . however , robert barker continued to print geneva bibles even after the ban , placing the spurious date of 1599 on new copies of genevas which were actually printed circa 1616 to 1625 . nicolson , adam . god 's secretaries : the making of the king james bible ( harpercollins , 2003 ) despite popular misconception , the puritan separatists or pilgrim fathers aboard the mayflower in 1620 brought to north america copies of the geneva bible .