Outlook Express

history . version 1.0 was released as microsoft internet mail and news in 1996 following the internet explorer 3 release . this add-on precedes the internet mail profile for microsoft exchange 4.0 bundled in windows 95 . version 2.0 was released at the end of 1996 . internet mail and news handled only plain text and rich text ( rtf ) email , lacking html email . in 1997 the app was changed and renamed as outlook express and bundled with internet explorer 4 . the windows executable file for outlook express , msimn.exe , is a holdover from the internet mail and news era . like internet explorer , outlook express 4 can run on mac system 7 , os 8 , and os 9 . at one point , in a later beta version of outlook express 5 , outlook express contained a sophisticated and adaptive spam filtering system ; however this feature was removed shortly before launch . it was speculated on various websites and newsgroups at that time , that the feature was not stable enough for the mass market . nearly two years later , a similar system , using a similar method of adaptive filtering , appeared as a feature of microsoft outlook . internet explorer 5 required outlook express 5 to save web archive files ( see mhtml ) . outlook express 6 is the last version of the software with outlook branding . it has a similar layout to outlook express 5 . it was included with windows xp . versions for windows . microsoft internet mail and news 1.0 was released in 1996 with internet explorer 3 . microsoft internet mail and news 2.0 was released later in 1996 . outlook express 4.0 , which was included in windows 98 ( june 1998 ) and integrated with internet explorer 4 , stored messages in . mbx files ( similar to the mbox format used in unix-based systems ) . outlook express 5.0 , which was included in windows 98 second edition ( june 1999 ) and integrated with internet explorer 5 , switched to . dbx files , with a separate file for each mailbox folder . outlook express 5.01 was included in windows 2000 ( february 2000 ) and integrated with internet explorer 5.01 . outlook express 5.5 was included in windows me ( june 2000 ) and integrated with internet explorer 5.5 . outlook express 6.0 was included in windows xp ( october 2001 ) and integrated with internet explorer 6 . versions for mac . outlook express 4.0 was included in microsoft office 98 macintosh edition . outlook express 5.01 was integrated with internet explorer 5 . outlook express 5.01 was bundled with internet explorer 5.01 . outlook express 5.5 was bundled with internet explorer 5.5 . replacements . builds of '' outlook express 7 '' appeared in early builds of windows vista when in development as '' longhorn '' . it relied on winfs for the management and storage of contacts and other data . the final version of vista included a successor to outlook express known as windows mail ( vista ) . . criticism . email standards . beginning with the text-based mail ( unix ) , email traditionally used the inline or bottom posting styles when replying to messages . outlook express , as well as lotus notes and microsoft outlook , top-post ( show replies newest to oldest ) by default . microsoft outlook and microsoft exchange use a proprietary email attachment format called transport neutral encapsulation format ( tnef ) to handle formatting and other features specific to outlook such as meeting requests . outlook express and other email clients are unable to read this format . this can be confusing to outlook express users ( as well as those who use other email clients ) who receive attachments sent from outlook . database corruption . outlook express has been prone to a number of problems which can corrupt its files database , especially when the database increases in size due to an increasing number of stored emails and during database compaction . this has led to a thriving market for apps that can back up , restore and recover corrupted files . an open-source project called undbx was also created , which seems to be successful in recovering corrupt databases . microsoft has also released documentation which may be able to correct some non-severe problems and restore access to email messages , without resorting to third-party solutions . however , with the latest updates applied , outlook express now makes backup copies of dbx files prior to compaction . they are stored in the recycle bin . if an error occurs during compaction and messages are lost , the dbx files can be copied from the recycle bin . security issues . outlook express was one of the earlier email clients to support html email and scripts . as a result , emails were commonly infected with viruses . previously , another security flaw was that a script could automatically be opened as an attachment . another bug was in outlook express 's attachment handling that allowed an executable to appear to be a harmless attachment such as a graphics file . opening or previewing the email could cause code to run without the user 's knowledge or consent . outlook express uses internet explorer to render html email . internet explorer has been subjected to many security vulnerabilities and concerns . with outlook express sp2 ( part of windows xp sp2 ) , microsoft has tried to correct the security holes . outlook express now blocks images inside emails by default . it uses only the restricted security zone for html email , which disables scripts and imposes restrictions on what web content can be rendered . it also warns when opening potentially malicious attachments . . handling of pgp/mime signed messages . outlook express does not correctly handle mime , and will not display the body of signed messages inline . users get a filled email and one attachment ( one of the message text and one of the signature ) and therefore need to open an attachment to see the email . if the email has been forwarded several times , users need to open attached email messages one inside the other multiple times to reach the parent email message . this bug has still not been rectified . the proper behavior is described in rfc 1847 . when replying or forwarding a message to a user who has a digital signature , outlook express gives an error and does not allow the user to continue if there is no digital signature installed for the sender . . extensibility . outlook express does not have a documented object model like microsoft outlook . programmatic access to , or control of outlook express for custom messaging applications or plugins is not officially documented and supported by microsoft . istorenamespace and istorefolder interfaces were documented in 2003 , but they are only related to the storage . some companies have managed to create their plugins hacking the interface using windows hooks . a significant one was the pgp plugin because it was the only example of a working plugin whose source code was available ( licensed under gpl ) . by 2003 , some companies provided commercial solutions to develop add-ins . . office 2007 spell checker incompatibility . outlook express does not have a dedicated spell checker . it can use the spell checkers from microsoft office if office is also installed . however , the office 2007 spell checkers , except for the french spell checker , are incompatible with outlook express . microsoft has acknowledged this problem , but does not provide any sort of remedy . a solution is to install any pre-office 2007 proofing tools or use a third party spell-checking app for outlook express . windows live mail , which is based on windows mail 's source code , contains built-in spell checking support ( now for us english and numerous other languages ) and is freely downloadable for windows xp . glitches and other unusual aspects . cancelling sending an email while it is being sent does not effectively prevent it from being sent . similarly , when importing . pst files , cancelling the import while it is in progress merely cancels the import of the current folder and the import resumes with the next folder . furthermore , outlook express only supports . dbx files that are smaller than 2 gb , and may have performance problems when dealing with files approaching that limit . . see also . list of usenet newsreaders comparison of usenet newsreaders microsoft mail windows messaging windows mail windows live mail apple mail windows 95 . references . external links .