Jean du Bellay

biography . du bellay was born at souday , léon séché , '' le cardinal du bellay , '' revue de la renaissance 1 ( 1901 ) , 217–238 , at pp . 217–219 . second of the six sons of louis , son of jean du bellay , seigneur de langey , and marguerite , daughter of raoullet , baron of le tour-landry . four of their sons survived infancy , including guillaume , martin , and rené . they had two daughters , renée , who married ambroise baron des cousteaux , and louise , who married jacques d'aunay , sieur de villeneuvr-la-guyart . the fief of bellay was located near saumur in anjou . bourilly , guillaume du bellay , p . 4 . he is said to have had his education in paris . denis de saint-marthe , gallia christiana i ( paris 1716 ) , p . 1320 . '' johannes vero noster a puero in parisiensis academiae sinu institutus . '' it is also speculated , however , that he studied at the university of angers . bourilly , guillaume du bellay , p . 6 . he had a licenciate in utroque iure ( civil law and canon law ) . he was a priest of the diocese of le mans . he was appointed bishop of bayonne by king francis i , whose appointment was approved by pope clement vii on 12 february 1524 . gulik and eubel , p . 128 . denis de saint-marthe , gallia christiana i ( paris 1716 ) , p . 1320 . he held the position until his transfer to the see of paris in 1532 . on 2 march 1533 , pope clement granted bishop du bellay the privilege of holding multiple benefices both in the diocese of paris and in other dioceses as well . king francis confirmed this indult on 1 october 1534 . gallia christiana viii ( paris 1744 ) , p . 160 . jean du bellay was succeeded as bishop of paris by his nephew eustache , on 16 march 1551 , after cardinal jean was dismissed by king henry ii . gulik and eubel , p . 270 . . diplomat in england . he was well-fitted for a diplomatic career , and carried out several missions in england ( 1527–1534 ) . he was ambassador ordinary from november 1527 to february 1529 , when his elder brother guillaume replaced him . when his brother departed , he was again ambassador , from 15 may 1529 to january 1530 . he returned on a mission in august–september 1530 , and again , as ambassador extraordinary , in october 1531 . after returning to court , he was immediately dispatched again to england on 6 november 1531 . bourilly , guillaume du bellay , pp . 77–84 . he was in england again as ambassador extraordinary in august and september 1532 . a meeting between the english and french monarchs took place at boulogne on 20 october 1532 , cardinal de tournon was present , according to the venetian ambassador giovanni antonio venier , along with the cardinals du prat ( the french chancellor ) , de bourbon , de lorraine and de gramont . rawdon brown , calendar iv , p . 362 . bourilly , guillaume du bellay , pp . 136–139 . at which bishop du bellay was present , hamy , p . 64 . and immediately thereafter cardinals tournon and de gramont were sent to rome to negotiate with pope clement vii . du bellay returned to england from november 1533 to january 1534 . catalogue des actes de francois ier , ix . paris : imprimerie nationale . 1907 . pp . 17 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 . in this last embassy , it was his duty to explain the agreements made between francis i and pope clement vii during their negotiations in marseille in october and november 1533 . . rome . he was then sent as ambassador extraordinary to the papal court in rome ( january–may 1534 ) . catalogue des actes de francois ier , ix , p . 63 . his mission in both english and roman embassies was to prevent the implementation of pope clement 's decree of excommunication against henry viii , who was a valuable ally of france against the emperor charles . bourilly ( 1907 ) , p . 1-2 . the pope 's decree was at first only monitory ; it gave king henry viii six months to repent his misdeeds . the pope needed to be convinced that he had repented , or was repenting , or would repent . one of the members of du bellay 's suite in his embassy to rome was françois rabelais , who was making the first of four journeys to rome . picot , i , pp . 95–97 . on their arrival in rome , they were accommodated in the residence of the bishop of faenza rodolfo pio di carpi , the future cardinal , who had recently returned from a papal embassy to the french court . despite the bishop 's best efforts , the imperial agents , who were well entrenched and vigorous in their advocacy , influenced the papal consistory to vote to approve the sentence against henry viii on 23 march 1534 . bourilly ( 1907 ) , p . 2-3 . henry 's plea to await further action until he could send a procurator to the papal court—only a delaying action—was allowed . and so the execution of the bull of excommunication was temporarily suspended . in september 1534 bishop du bellay 's secretary , claude de chappuys accompanied the french cardinals who were going to rome for the conclave that followed the death of pope clement vii . there , the cardinals and chappuys used their influence to promote the candidacy of the bishop of paris for a cardinal 's hat . they were assured that the new pope , pope paul iii , was favourable to their importuning . best , p . 136 . . cardinal . on 21 may 1535 , at his second consistory for the promotion of cardinals , pope paul iii created seven new cardinals , among them jean du bellay . he was named cardinal priest of the titulus of santa cecilia in trastevere on 31 may . his cardinal 's hat was sent to him in france on 3 april . beginning on 27 june he made the journey to rome , stopping in ferrara for negotiations with the duke about the war over milan , and then moving on to rome , where he appeared personally for his induction ceremonies at the consistory of 6 august . gulik and eubel , p . 24 and n . 1 . best , pp . 136–137 . he had additional reasons , however , for going to rome . he was sent by king francis to seek papal assistance against the aggression of the emperor charles v in the struggle for the duchy of milan . catalogue des actes de francois ier , ix , pp . 54 and 63–64 . he was again accompanied by françois rabelais . picot , i , p . 96 . on 21 july 1536 du bellay was nominated '' lieutenant-general '' to the king at paris and in the île de france , catalogue des actes de francois ier , iii . paris : imprimerie nationale . 1889 . p . 229 , no . 8577 . and was entrusted with the organisation of the defence against the imperialists under the leadership of the count of nassau , who , under the direction of the emperor charles v , were invading eastern france while charles was attacking provence . best , p . 137 . when his brother guillaume du bellay went to piedmont , jean was put in charge of the negotiations with the german protestants , principally through the humanist johannes sturm and the historian johann sleidan . in the last years of the reign of francis i , cardinal du bellay was in favour with the duchesse d'étampes , and received a number of benefices : he was administrator of the bishopric of limoges on the nomination of the king and with the approval of pope paul iii on 22 august 1541 ; he held the diocese until the appointment of antoine seguin on 13 august 1544 . gulik and eubel , p . 222 . he was named administrator of the archbishopric of bordeaux , and approved by the pope on 17 december 1544 ; he held the post until 3 july 1551 . gulik and eubel , p . 142 . he became bishop of le mans on 1 november 1546 upon the resignation of his brother rené ; he himself resigned in july 1556 . gulik and eubel , p . 162 . . eclipse under henry ii . king francis i died on 31 march 1547 . his funeral ceremonies were conducted at s . denis on 23 may , and were presided over by cardinal du bellay . fisquet , p . 360 . with the death of king francis , however , the cardinal 's influence in the council was overshadowed by that of françois de tournon . his niece and patroness , the duchesse d'étampes was replaced by king henri 's mistress , diane de poitiers . the old court favourites had to give way to new favourites . when henry ii announced his new royal council ( conseil privé ) , du bellay 's name was not among the thirteen councillors admitted to the morning meeting , but only ( along with other cardinals , bourbon , ferrara and châtillon ) to the meetings which took place after dinner . the only cardinals in the first rank were tournon and charles de guise-lorraine , the archbishop of rheims . ribier , ii , p . 1 . du bellay , along with most of councillors of francis i , found themselves excluded from major decisions . du bellay was sent away , to rome ( 1547 ) , to oversee french affairs before the holy see . he was not the french ambassador ; that role belonged to claude d'urfé ( 1501–1558 ) . in a letter of 29 april 1549 , the secretary of state , du thier , complained to the king that du bellay 's letters from rome were voluminous , but contained not one word of substance . ribier , ii , p . 162 : '' le cardinal . nous a écrit des volumes si grands , qu'ils serioent suffisans pour contenir toute la chronique de l'empereur , et toutesfois il n ' y a en substance qu'un mot . '' his position as a french representative was cancelled when the cardinal of ferrara , ippolito d'este arrived in rome . du bellay complained bitterly to the king in a letter of 23 august 1549 . ribier , ii , p . 243 . he returned to france . following the death of pope paul iii in november 1549 , cardinal du bellay headed for rome once again . he and the other french cardinals were sent by henry ii , who also sent letters to rome , threatening trouble if the cardinals in rome did not wait for the french cardinals before they began the conclave . ribier , ii , p . 256 . du bellay obtained eight votes voting was by preference ballot . a cardinal could place as many names as he wished on his ballot . hence , the number of votes was sometimes several times the number of voters . but the canonical rule was that a candidate must receive the votes of two-thirds of the voters to be elected . in the conclave to elect the new pope . this is remarkable , since there were more than twenty cardinals in the french faction . evidently he did not have the favour of the french king . the leading candidates were reginald pole , giovanni morone , and gian pietro carafa ; cardinal du bellay was not papabile . on 25 february 1550 he was promoted suburbicarian bishop of albano by the new pope , julius iii , replacing cardinal ennio filonardi , who had died during the conclave . gulik and eubel , p . 56 . when cardinal du bellay returned to france after the conclave , he took up residence in his italian-style villa at saint-maur , some seven miles southeast of paris , where he enjoyed the company of rabelais , macrin , michel l'hôpital , and his young cousin joachim du bellay . dickinson , p . 2 . king henry ii struck again in 1551 , dismissing him from the see of paris . fisquet , p . 360 and 364 . catherine de ' medici was a frequent visitor , and in 1563 she purchased the château du bellay from his heirs . after three quiet years passed in retirement in france ( 1550–1553 ) , the cardinal was charged with a new mission to pope julius iii . in rome he discovered that the imperialists were in control everywhere , and he was shocked when , on 11 december 1553 , cardinal carafa was given the see of ostia and the office of dean of the college of cardinals , which du bellay believed ought to have been his . he complained in a letter of 22 december 1553 to the constable de montmorency . ribier , ii , pp . 481–482 . the cardinal du bellay continued to live in rome thenceforth in great state . in 1555 he was appointed bishop of ostia and dean of the college of cardinals , to fill the position left vacant by the election of cardinal giovanni pietro carafa to the papacy as pope paul iv . gulik and eubel , p . 56 . j . p . adams , sede vacante 1555 . retrieved 17 may 2016 . the appointment was disapproved of by henry ii and brought du bellay into fresh disgrace . paul iv died on 18 august 1559 after a contentious reign of four years , two months and twenty-seven days . the conclave to elect his successor held its opening ceremonies on 5 september 1559 with forty-four cardinals in attendance . on 6 september , cardinal du bellay , who was dean of the college of cardinals , celebrated the mass of the holy spirit , and then the conclave settled down to a leisurely conduct of business . they finished the electoral capitulations on 8 september , and the bulls referring to conclave rules were read on 9 september . du bellay , however , was ill , and did not attend the reading . in the first scrutiny , held later that day , he had to cast his vote from his sickbed . beginning on 26 september various ambassadors , led by the spanish ambassador , appeared at the entrance to the conclave area and harangued the cardinals inside about the necessity of getting a pope elected . security was so bad that on 2 october , the cardinals appointed a reform committee , with du bellay its leader , to restore order . it was ineffective . on 9 october the known agents of the powers and a considerable number of conclavists were expelled . on 1 november there were forty-seven cardinals at the conclave , five confined to bed . on the afternoon of christmas day , after a good deal of politicking , the cardinals finally settled on cardinal giovanni angelo de ' medici , who was elected by acclamation . he was asked if he would consent to a scrutiny the next morning , and he agreed , providing that it was recognised that he had been validly and canonically elected on the 25th . he chose the throne name pius iv . cardinal du bellay was absent . j . p . adams , sede vacante 1559 . retrieved 17 may 2016 . . death . cardinal jean du bellay died in rome on 16 february 1560 at 13:30 hours , rome time , in his gardens at the baths of diocletian . he was buried in the church of santissima trinità dei monti . gulik and eubel , p . 24 , note 3 . since he had died in rome , the appointment to his vacated benefices , according to the concordat of bologna of 1516 , belonged to the pope , not to the king . pope pius iv reminded henry ii of this in a letter of 9 august 1560 . this was one of the principal reasons that french kings did not want their very richly beneficed cardinals to reside in rome ; as a result , when a conclave became necessary , either the french party did not arrive in time , or did not bother to come at all . since they were unknown to most of the cardinals , they were rarely serious candidates for the papal office . du bellay 's last will and testament was contested , and his relatives fought over various parts of the inheritance . the cardinal 's sister louise , who had received the cardinal 's property still kept in the episcopal palace in paris , to ensure her claim to the inheritance , made a donation of the cardinal 's antiquities to the queen mother , catherine de ' medicis . . appreciation . less resolute and reliable than his brother guillaume , the cardinal had brilliant qualities , and an open and free mind . other appreciations : fisquet , pp . 360–363 . he was on the side of toleration and protected the reformers . guillaume budé was his friend , françois rabelais his faithful secretary and doctor ; men of letters , like etienne dolet , and the poet salmon macrin , were indebted to him for assistance . an orator and writer of latin verse , he left three books of graceful latin poems ( printed with salmon macrin 's odes , 1546 , by robert estienne ) , and some other compositions , including francisci francorum regis epistola apologetica ( 1542 ) . his voluminous correspondence , now being published , is remarkable for its verve and picturesque quality . du bellay and françois rabelais . rabelais travelled frequently to rome with his friend cardinal jean du bellay , and lived for a short time in turin with du bellay 's brother , guillaume , during which françois i was his patron . picot , i . pp . 95–104 . rabelais probably spent some time in hiding , threatened by being labelled a heretic . only the protection of du bellay saved rabelais after the condemnation of his novel by the sorbonne . they put gargantua and pantagruel on their index in 1542 , the third book in 1546–1547 , and the fourth book in 1552 . amy c . graves , '' sorbonne , '' in : raymond mauny ( 1977 ) . '' rabelais et la sorbonne , '' les amis de rabelais et de la devinière ( tours ) , 3 , no . 6 , 1977 . pp . 252–261 . rabelais was under scrutiny by the church due to '' humanistic '' nature of his writings . rabelais 's main work of this nature is the gargantua and pantagruel series , which contain a great deal of allegorical , suggestive messages . references . bibliography . publishes fifty letters of du bellay michon , cédric , petris , loris ( edd . ) ( 2014 ) , le cardinal jean du bellay . diplomatie et culture dans l'europe de la renaissance . rennes : presses universitaires de rennes . 978-2-86906-305-1 eighteen articles , in french pauwels , yves . '' philibert de l'orme et ses cardinaux : marcello cervini et jean du bellay , '' in frédérique lemerle , yves pauwels et gennaro toscano ( dir . ) ( 2009 ) . les cardinaux de la renaissance et la modernité artistique , villeneuve d'ascq , irhis-institut de recherches historiques du septentrion ( '' histoire et littérature de l'europe du nord-ouest '' , no . 40 ) , p . & nbsp ; 149–156 . ( in french ) potter , david l . '' jean du bellay et l'angleterre , 1527–50 '' , in loris petris , p . galand , o . christin , and c . michon ( eds ) , actes du colloque jean du bellay ( neuchâtel , 2014 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 47–66 . ( in french ) letters to and from the cardinal . attribution . caution should be used ; the content is obsolete .