Viola (plant)

description . annual or perennial caulescent or acaulescent ( with or without a visible plant stem above the ground ) herbs , shrubs or very rarely treelets . in acaulescent taxa the foliage and flowers appear to rise from the ground . the remainder have short stems with foliage and flowers produced in the axils of the leaves ( axillary ) . viola typically have heart-shaped or reniform ( kidney-shaped ) , scalloped leaf , though a number have linear or palmate leaves . the simple leaves of plants with either habit are arranged alternately ; the acaulescent species produce basal rosettes . plants always have leaves with stipules that are often leaf-like . the flowers of the vast majority of the species are strongly zygomorphic with bilateral symmetry and solitary , but occasionally form cymes . the flowers are formed from five petals ; four are upswept or fan-shaped with two per side , and there is one , broad , lobed lower petal pointing downward . this petal may be slightly or much shorter than the others and is weakly differentiated . the shape of the petals and placement defines many species , for example , some species have a '' spur '' on the end of each petal while most have a spur on the lower petal . the spur may vary from scarcely exserted ( projecting ) to very long , such as in viola rostrata . solitary flowers end long stalks with a pair of bracteoles . the flowers have five sepals that persist after blooming , and in some species the sepals enlarge after blooming . the corolla ranges from white to yellow , orange or various shades of blue and violet or multicolored , often blue and yellow , with or without a yellow throat . the flowers have five free stamens with short free filaments that are oppressed against the ovary , with a dorsal connective appendage that is large , entire and oblong to ovate . only the lower two stamens are calcarate ( possessing nectary spurs that are inserted on the lowest petal into the spur or a pouch ) . the styles are filiform ( threadlike ) or clavate ( clubshaped ) , thickened at their tip , being globose to rostellate ( beaked ) . the stigmas are head-like , narrowed or often beaked . the flowers have a superior ovary with one cell , which has three placentae , containing many ovules . after flowering , fruit capsules are produced that are thick walled , with few to many seeds per carpel , and dehisce ( split open ) by way of three valves . on drying , the capsules may eject seeds with considerable force to distances of several meters . the nutlike seeds , which are obovoid to globose , are typically arillate ( with a specialized outgrowth ) and have straight embryos , flat cotyledons , and soft fleshy endosperm that is oily . phytochemistry . one characteristic of some viola is the elusive scent of their flowers ; along with terpenes , a major component of the scent is a ketone compound called ionone , which temporarily desensitizes the receptors of the nose , thus preventing any further scent being detected from the flower until the nerves recover . taxonomy . history . first formally described by carl linnaeus in 1753 with 19 species , the genus viola bears his botanical authority , l . when jussieu established the hierarchical system of families ( 1789 ) , he placed viola in the cisti ( rock roses ) , though by 1811 he suggested viola be separated from these . however , in 1802 batsch had already established a separate family , which he called violariae based on viola as the type genus , with seven other genera . although violariae continued to be used by some authors , such as bentham and hooker in 1862 ( as violarieae ) , most authors adopted the alternative name violaceae , first proposed by de lamarck and de candolle in 1805 , and gingins ( 1823 ) and saint-hilaire ( 1824 ) . however de candolle also used violarieae in his 1824 prodromus . phylogeny . viola is one of about 25 genera and about 600 species in the large family eudicot family violaceae , divided into subfamilies and tribes . while most genera are monotypic , viola is a very large genus , variously circumscribed as having between 500 and 600 species . historically it was placed in subfamily violoideae , tribe violeae . but these divisions have been shown to be artificial and not monophyletic . molecular phylogenetic studies show that viola occurs in clade i of the family , as viola , schweiggeria , noisettia and allexis , in which schweiggeria and noisettia are monotypic and form a sister group to viola . subdivision . viola is a large genus , that has traditionally been treated in sections . one of these was that of gingins ( 1823 ) , based on stigma morphology , with five sections ( nomimium , dischidium , chamaemelanium , melanium , leptidium ) . the extensive taxonomic studies of wilhelm becker , culminating in his 1925 conspectus , resulted in 14 sections and many infrasectional groups . the largest and most diverse , being section viola , with 17 subsections . in addition to subsections , series were also described . alternatively , some authors have preferred to subdivide the genus into subgenera . subsequent treatments were by gershoy ( 1934 ) and clausen ( 1964 ) , using subsections and series . these were all based on morphological characteristics . subsequent studies using molecular phylogenetic methods , such as that of ballard et al . ( 1998 ) have shown that many of these traditional divisions are not monophyletic , the problem being related to a high degree of hybridization . in particular section nomimium was dismembered into several new sections and transferring part of it to section viola . section viola s . lat . is represented by four sections , viola sensu stricto , plagiostigma s . str . , nosphinium sensu lato . and the v . spathulata group . in that analysis , the s american sections appear to be the basal groups , starting with rubellium , then leptidium . however , the exact phylogenetic relationships remain unresolved , as a consequence many different taxonomic nomenclatures are in use , including groupings referred to as grex . marcussen et al . place the five s american sections , andinium , leptidium , tridens , rubellium and chilenium at the base of the phylogenetic tree , in that order . these are followed by the single australian section , erpetion , as sister group to chilenium , the northern hemisphere sections and finally the single african section , v . abyssinica . these sections are morphologically , chromosomally , and geographically distinct . sections . seventeen sections are recognized , listed alphabetically ( approximate no . species ) ; sect . andinium w.becker ( 113 ) s america sect . chamaemelanium ging . s.lat . ( 61 ) n america , northeast asia ( includes dischidium , orbiculares ) subsect . chamaemelanium subsect . nudicaules subsect . nuttalianae sect . chilenium w.becker ( 8 ) southern s america sect . danxiaviola w . b . liao et q . fan ( 1 ) china sect . delphiniopsis w.becker ( 3 ) western eurasia : southern spain ; balkans sect . erpetion ( banks ) w.becker ( 11–18 ) eastern australia ; tasmania sect . leptidium ging . ( 19 ) s america sect . melanium ging . ( 125 ) western eurasia ( pansies ) sect . nosphinium w.becker s.lat . ( 31–50 ) n , c and northern s america ; beringia ; hawaii sect . nov . a ( v . abyssinica group ) ( 1–3 ) africa : equatorial high mountains sect . nov . b ( v . spathulata group ) ( 7–9 ) western and central asia : northern iraq to mongolia sect . plagiostigma godr . ( 120 ) northern hemisphere ( includes diffusae ) grex primulifolia sect . rubellium w.becker ( 3–6 ) s america : chile sect . sclerosium w.becker ( 1–4 ) northeastern africa to southwestern asia sect . tridens w.becker ( 2 ) southern s america sect . viola s.str . ( rostellatae nom . illeg . ) ( 75 ) northern hemisphere ( violets ) ( includes repentes ) subsect . rostratae kupffer ( w.becker ) subsect . viola sect . xylinosium w.becker ( 3–4 ) mediterranean region . species . the genus includes dog violets , a group of scentless species which are the most common viola in many areas , sweet violet ( viola odorata ) ( named from its sweet scent ) , and many other species whose common name includes the word '' violet '' . but not other '' violets '' : neither streptocarpus sect . saintpaulia ( '' african violets '' , gesneriaceae ) nor erythronium dens-canis ( '' dogtooth violets '' , liliaceae ) are related to viola . list of selected species . ; images includes maps