Black Wednesday

prelude . when the erm was set up in 1979 , the united kingdom declined to join . this was a controversial decision , as the chancellor of the exchequer , geoffrey howe , was staunchly pro-european . his successor , nigel lawson , a believer in a fixed exchange rate , admired the low inflationary record of west germany . he attributed it to the strength of the deutsche mark and the management of the bundesbank . thus , although the uk had not joined the erm , from early 1987 to march 1988 the treasury followed a semi-official policy of 'shadowing ' the deutsche mark . matters came to a head in a clash between lawson and prime minister margaret thatcher 's economic adviser alan walters , when walters claimed that the exchange rate mechanism was '' half baked '' . sir alan walters . the daily telegraph ( 5 january 2009 ) . retrieved 21 october 2019 . this led to lawson 's resignation as chancellor ; he was replaced by former treasury chief secretary john major who , with douglas hurd , the then foreign secretary , convinced the cabinet to sign britain up to the erm in october 1990 , effectively guaranteeing that the british government would follow an economic and monetary policy preventing the exchange rate between the pound and other member currencies from fluctuating by more than 6 % . on 8 october 1990 , thatcher entered the pound into the erm at dm 2.95 to the pound . hence , if the exchange rate ever neared the bottom of its permitted range , dm 2.773 ( €1.4178 at the dm/euro conversion rate ) , the government would be obliged to intervene . in 1989 , the uk had inflation three times the rate of germany , higher interest rates at 15 % , and much lower labour productivity than france and germany , which indicated the uk 's different economic state in comparison to other erm countries . 1990–1992 : britain and the politics of the european exchange rate mechanism . libcom ( 13 january 2006 ) . retrieved 21 october 2019 . from the beginning of the 1990s , high german interest rates , set by the bundesbank to counteract inflationary effects related to excess expenditure on german reunification , caused significant stress across the whole of the erm . the uk and italy had additional difficulties with their double deficits , while the uk was also hurt by the rapid depreciation of the united states dollar – a currency in which many british exports were priced – that summer . issues of national prestige and the commitment to a doctrine that the fixing of exchange rates within the erm was a pathway to a single european currency inhibited the adjustment of exchange rates . in the wake of the rejection of the maastricht treaty by the danish electorate in a referendum in the spring of 1992 , and an announcement that there would be a referendum in france as well , those erm currencies that were trading close to the bottom of their erm bands came under pressure from foreign exchange traders . aykens , peter . conflicting authorities : states , currency markets and the erm crisis of 1992–93 . review of international studies , vol . 28 , no . 2 ( apr . 2002 ) , pp . 359–380 . retrieved 21 october 2019 . in the months leading up to black wednesday , among many other currency traders , george soros had been building a huge short position in pounds sterling that would become immensely profitable if the pound fell below the lower band of the erm . soros believed the rate at which the united kingdom was brought into the exchange rate mechanism was too high , inflation was too high ( triple the german rate ) , and british interest rates were hurting their asset prices . . the currency traders act . the uk government attempted to prop up the depreciating pound to avoid withdrawal from the monetary system the country had joined only two years earlier . john major raised interest rates to 10 % and authorised the spending of billions of pounds of foreign currency reserves to buy up sterling being sold on the currency markets . these measures failed to prevent the pound falling below its minimum level in the erm . the treasury took the decision to defend sterling 's position , believing that to devalue would promote inflation . currency traders began a massive sell-off of pounds on tuesday 15 september 1992 . the exchange rate mechanism required the bank of england to accept any offers to sell pounds . however , the bank of england only accepted orders during the trading day . when the markets opened in london the next morning , the bank of england began their attempt to prop up their currency , as decided by norman lamont ( chancellor of the exchequer ) and robin leigh-pemberton ( governor of the bank of england ) . they began accepting orders of £300 million twice before 8:30 am , but to little effect . the bank of england 's intervention was ineffective because traders were dumping pounds far faster . the bank of england continued to buy , and traders continued to sell , until lamont told prime minister john major that their pound purchasing was failing to produce results . inman , phillip ( 13 september 2012 ) . black wednesday 20 years on : how the day unfolded . the guardian . retrieved 21 october 2019 . at 10:30 am on 16 september , the british government announced an increase in the base interest rate , from an already high 10 % , to 12 % to tempt speculators to buy pounds . despite this and a promise later the same day to raise base rates again to 15 % , dealers kept selling pounds , convinced that the government would not keep its promise . by 7:00 that evening , lamont announced britain would leave the erm and rates would remain at the new level of 12 % ; however , on the next day the interest rate was back to 10 % . it was later revealed that the decision to withdraw had been agreed at an emergency meeting during the day between lamont , major , foreign secretary douglas hurd , president of the board of trade michael heseltine , and home secretary kenneth clarke ( the latter three all being staunch pro-europeans as well as senior cabinet ministers ) , major 's dither cost uk billions , says lamont . the independent ( 27 september 1999 ) . retrieved 21 october 2019 . and that the interest rate hike to 15 % had only been a temporary measure to prevent a rout in the pound that afternoon . johnston , philip ( 10 september 2012 ) . black wednesday : the day that britain went over the edge . the daily telegraph . retrieved 21 october 2019 . . aftermath . other erm countries such as italy , whose currencies had breached their bands during the day , returned to the system with broadened bands or with adjusted central parities . sevilla , christina r . explaining the september 1992 erm crisis : the maastricht bargain and domestic politics in germany , france , and britain . harvard university . retrieved 21 october 2019 . even in this relaxed form , erm-i proved vulnerable , and ten months later the rules were relaxed further to the point of imposing very little constraint on the domestic monetary policies of member states . the effect of the low german interest rates , and high british interest rates , had arguably put britain into recession as large numbers of businesses failed and the housing market crashed . some commentators , following norman tebbit , took to referring to erm as an '' eternal recession mechanism '' after the uk fell into recession during the early 1990s . while many people in the uk recall black wednesday as a national disaster that permanently affected the country 's international prestige , some conservatives claim that the forced ejection from the erm was a '' golden wednesday '' or '' white wednesday '' , the day that paved the way for an economic revival , with the conservatives handing tony blair 's new labour a much stronger economy in 1997 than had existed in 1992 as the new economic policy swiftly devised in the aftermath of black wednesday led to re-establishment of economic growth with falling unemployment and inflation . monetary policy switched to inflation targeting . the conservative party ( uk ) 's reputation for economic excellence had been damaged to the extent that the electorate was more inclined to support a claim of the opposition of the time – that the economic recovery ought to be credited to external factors , as opposed to government policies implemented by the conservatives . the conservatives had recently won the 1992 general election , and the gallup poll for september showed a small lead of 2.5 % for the conservative party . by the october poll , following black wednesday , their share of the intended vote in the poll had plunged from 43 % to 29 % . the conservative government then suffered a string of by-election defeats which saw its 21-seat majority eroded by december 1996 . the party ’ s performances in local government elections were similarly dismal during this time , while labour made huge gains . black wednesday was a major factor in the conservatives finally losing the 1997 general election to labour , who won by a landslide under the leadership of tony blair . the conservatives failed to gain significant ground at the 2001 general election under the leadership of william hague , with labour winning another landslide majority . the conservatives did not take government again until david cameron led them to victory in the 2010 general election , 13 years later . george soros made over £1 & nbsp ; billion in profit by short selling sterling . . see also . impossible trinity sale of uk gold reserves , 1999–2002 . footnotes . external links . black wednesday , bbc.co.uk . retrieved 11 january 2017 . black wednesday is remembered as a dark day in british economic history . but the clouds were lined with gold . martin upton , head of the centre for financial management at the open university business school tells ione mako about the upside , open.edu , 24 september 2009 .