Young Marble Giants

history . young marble giants were formed from the ashes of 'true wheel ' which also included friends matthew davis and louise porter ( later signed to emi ) stuart moxham wrote the majority of the band 's songs . their sound was characterised by phil 's prominent bass lines , stuart 's rhythm guitar ( a rickenbacker 425 ) and galanti electric organ lines and statton 's vocals . stuart moxham 's girlfriend , wendy smith , lent stuart the money to buy the rickenbacker . smith , an art student in cardiff at the time the ymg 's were forming , photographed the band 's us tour and also designed cover art for several singles and albums by weekend . very early in their existence , there was a fourth member of the band , peter joyce , who was a cousin of the moxham brothers . joyce was a telephone engineer and skilled at electronics , who had made his own synthesiser from a kit . it made sounds similar to eno 's synths in the early roxy music and kraftwerk , who employed similar 'low-tech/high-tech ' electronics . the ymgs used tape recordings of joyce 's home-made drum machine since they did not wish to have a drummer . they were also interested in effects devices such as ring modulators and reverb units , with the emphasis always on simplicity . their first vinyl release was on the compilation lp is the war over ? on cardiff diy label , z block records , in october 1979 . while signed to uk independent record label , rough trade records the ymgs released two eps , final day and testcard , and an album , colossal youth ( a reference to the early greek 'kouros ' marble statues , from which the ymgs took the inspiration for their name . ) the artwork of the album was inspired by the beatles album with the beatles . the band toured europe and north america and played in berlin , los angeles , san francisco , vancouver and new york . touring companions included the band cabaret voltaire . musical influences included eno , kraftwerk , neil young , lou reed , the velvet underground , roxy music , david bowie , can and others . the band were acquainted with scritti politti , the band of cardiff native green gartside , and signed to the same label , rough trade records . it was revealed in the 2003 book journals that the band were , along with the vaselines , kurt cobain 's favourite band . courtney love 's band hole covered the young marble giants track '' credit in the straight world '' ; a cover version of their song '' the man amplifier '' was included on the magnetic fields single '' why i cry '' as a b-side . stuart moxham was a fan of manchester guitarist vini reilly 's early work , and was also very interested in dub music . their single '' final day '' was covered by both belle and sebastian and galaxie 500 , and was included in the pitchfork 500 . . post-breakup projects . after the band split up in 1980 , stuart moxham formed the gist , whose song 'love at first sight ' became a hit in continental europe when covered by french pop singer étienne daho under the title 'paris , le flore ' . following a very severe motorbike accident stuart concentrated on home recording , which resulted in the album embrace the herd ( 1982 ) again on rough trade , and his first cd album signal path ( 1992 ) on the chicago-based feel good all over label , before fans persuaded him to enter the studio again . the result was the album random rules ( 1993 ) and featured spike ( guitar & viola ) , younger brother andrew ( drums ) and london-based french songwriter louis philippe ( keys & arrangements ) . a band was formed to perform stuart 's new material , which gigged , albeit briefly , in france and the uk . another album , cars in the grass , followed . stuart had also been recording in the usa ( the album fine tuning and six tracks on the album barbara manning sings with the original artists ( 1993 ) ) , where he has acquired a small fanbase . now based in the west country , moxham is still writing songs . a new album , the huddle house , recorded as a duet with louis philippe , with whom he 's regularly performed , was released on wonder records in may 2007 . alison statton , spike and simon emmerson ( later of working week and afro celt sound system ) formed weekend ( with phil moxham on bass ) and several jazz musicians including larry stabbins , harry beckett and keith tippett . in 1989 – 1990 , alison statton worked with ian devine , the former guitarist of the post-punk group ludus . they released two records together , the prince of wales and cardiffians . blaine l . reininger of tuxedomoon was a featured performer on the prince of wales . later , philip moxham played bass for the communards and everything but the girl . he features on their fourth album , idlewild . he also worked with david thomas and the pedestrians . reformation . in early 2003 , statton and the moxham brothers reunited for a bbc radio wales radio special . they performed one new song , '' alright , '' on this special . a reunion show was held in hay-on-wye on 27 may 2007 , part of the hay-on-wye , with stuart moxham 's website explaining : '' young marble giants reform for a one-off celebration of domino records ' re-release of their album colossal youth , combined in a 3 cd package with the lo-fi , private reference recordings of the salad days album and the otherwise unobtainable peel sessions . '' hay-on-wye was not a one-off . convinced by the booking agency , the band also played a show for the bb-mix festival in boulogne billancourt , just outside paris , on 28 october 2007 . the drum-machine part was played by younger moxham brother andrew who played an electronic-drumkit . the band continued to perform over this period , including appearances at the primavera sound festival on 31 may 2008 and at the hebbel am ufer ( hau ) theatre in berlin on 16 january 2009 . the ymgs played the entirety of colossal youth at all tomorrow 's parties in minehead , somerset , on 9 may 2009 – they were chosen by jeff mangum of neutral milk hotel for a return performance at the all tomorrow 's parties festival that he curated in march 2012 in minehead . the band played gigs at the dancehouse in manchester on 19 october 2014 and stereo in glasgow on 20 october . they also performed at the mimi festival , on the frioul island in marseille , on 3 july 2015 . on 8 june 2016 , stuart moxham wrote on the band 's facebook page that the band was no more . young marble giants ' last show was in london in august 2015 . discography . studio albums . colossal youth ( february 1980 ) reached no . 3 on the uk indie chart , no . 20 nz . eps . final day ( june 1980 ) reached no . 6 on the uk indie chart testcard e.p . ep ( march 1981 ) reached no . 2 on the uk indie chart . live recordings . peel sessions ( 1991 ) live at the hurrah ! ( 2004 ) . compilations . salad days ( 2000 ) compilation of demo versions of songs which appeared on colossal youth and testcard . gallery . image : ymg_000.jpg phil and stuart moxham image : ymg_001.jpg alison statton , peter joyce , phil and stuart image : ymg_002.jpg stuart on rickenbacker and phil on hayman bass alison , phil and stuart image : ymg_005.jpg alison and peter with the synth image : ymg_006.jpg stuart on rickenbacker image : ymg_007.jpg philip moxham , 1978/79 image : young marble giants live at factory festival , nivelles , belgium ( 2008 ) . jpg at the factory festival , nivelles , belgium , 2008 . references . external links . young marble giants official facebook page young marble giants at julietippex.com