Stradivarius

construction . stradivari made his instruments using an inner form , unlike the french copyists , such as vuillaume , who employed an outer form . it is clear from the number of forms throughout his career that he experimented with some of the dimensions of his instruments . the woods used included spruce for the top , willow for the internal blocks and linings , and maple for the back , ribs , and neck . there has been conjecture that the wood used may have been treated with several types of minerals , both before and after construction of a violin . scientists at national taiwan university have detected trace amounts of aluminum , copper , and calcium in wood from stradivari violins . the traces may have come from chemical preservatives applied by loggers to the wood they sold . as well , the violin makers applied varnishes to their instruments . potassium borate ( borax ) may have been used to protect against woodworm . sodium and potassium silicate may have been used to prevent mildew , rotting and insect damage . simone fernando sacconi suggested that vernice bianca , an egg tempera varnish composed of gum arabic , honey , and egg white , may have been used . more recently , french chemist jean-philippe echard and his co-workers have studied varnishes on stradivarius violins . he reports that even when varnish is no longer visible to the human eye on the surface of older violins , it can be detected within the top layers of cells . a lower layer of varnish is found within the topmost wood cells while an upper rests upon the wood . echard 's findings also suggest that stradivari used a mixture of common cremonese resin , oil , and pigment as a varnish , rather than making his own . echard did not find traces of specialized ingredients such as protein materials , gums , or fossil amber . a comparative study published in '' plos one '' in 2008 found no significant differences in median densities between modern and classical violins , or between classical violins from different origins ; instead the survey of several modern and classical examples of violins highlighted a notable distinction when comparing density differentials . these results suggest that differences in density differentials in the material may have played a significant role in the sound production of classical violins . a later survey , focused on comparing median densities in both classical and modern violin examples , questioned the role available materials may have played in sound production differences , though it made no comment on variations in density differentials . the content of copper and aluminium is higher than current instruments . . market value . a stradivarius made in the 1680s , or during stradivari 's '' long pattern '' period from 1690 to 1700 , could be worth hundreds of thousands to several million u.s . dollars at today 's prices . the 1697 '' molitor '' stradivarius , once rumored to have belonged to napoleon ( it did belong to a general in his army , count gabriel jean joseph molitor ) , sold in 2010 at tarisio auctions to violinist anne akiko meyers for 3,600,000 , at the time a world record . depending on condition , instruments made during stradivari 's '' golden period '' from 1700 to about 1725 can be worth millions of dollars . in 2011 , his '' lady blunt '' violin from 1721 , which is in pristine condition , was sold in london for 15.9 & nbsp ; million ( it is named after lord byron 's granddaughter lady anne blunt , who owned it for 30 years ) . it was sold by the nippon music foundation in aid of the japanese earthquake and tsunami appeal . in spring 2014 the '' macdonald '' viola was put up for auction through the musical instrument auction house ingles & hayday in conjunction with sotheby 's via silent auction with a minimum bid of 45 & nbsp ; million . the auction failed to reach its minimum bid by 25 june 2014 , and the viola was not sold . vice magazine reported in may 2013 that '' in recent years , stradivarius investment funds have started to appear , pushing already astronomical prices even higher '' . stradivarius instruments are at risk of theft . stolen instruments are often recovered , however , even after being missing for many years . they are difficult to sell illicitly as dealers will typically call the police if approached by a seller with a stradivarius known to have been stolen . in recent years , the general kyd stradivarius was stolen in 2004 . it was returned three weeks later by a woman who found it and handed it over to the police . the sinsheimer/iselin was stolen in hanover , germany in 2008 and recovered in 2009 . the lipinski stradivarius was stolen in an armed robbery on 27 january 2014 and subsequently recovered . the ames stradivarius was stolen in 1981 and recovered in 2015 . a number of stolen instruments remain missing , such as the davidoff-morini , stolen in 1995 , the le maurien , stolen in 2002 , and the karpilowsky , stolen in 1953 . . comparisons in sound quality . above all , these instruments are famous for the quality of sound they produce . however , the many blind experiments from 1817 a guitar-like violin made by the naval engineer françois chanot , a member of a family of luthiers . a committee of scientists and musicians , listening to the violins played in an adjacent room , judged chanot 's violin to be at least as good as the stradivarius , but apparently chanot 's instruments quickly lost their good qualities . to the present ( as of 2014 ) have never found any difference in sound between stradivari 's violins and high-quality violins in comparable style of other makers and periods , nor has acoustic analysis . in a particularly famous test on a bbc radio 3 programme in 1977 , the violinists isaac stern and pinchas zukerman and the violin expert and dealer charles beare tried to distinguish between the '' chaconne '' stradivarius , a 1739 guarneri del gesú , an 1846 vuillaume , and a 1976 british violin played behind a screen by a professional soloist . the two violinists were allowed to play all the instruments first . none of the listeners identified more than two of the four instruments . two of the listeners identified the 20th-century violin as the stradivarius . violinists and others have criticized these tests on various grounds such as that they are not double-blind ( in most cases ) , the judges are often not experts , and the sounds of violins are hard to evaluate objectively and reproducibly . in a test in 2009 , the british violinist matthew trusler played his 1711 stradivarius , said to be worth two million u.s . dollars , and four modern violins made by the swiss violin-maker . one of rhonheimer 's violins , made with wood that the empa ( swiss federal laboratories for materials science and technology ) researcher francis schwarze had treated with fungi , received 90 of the 180 votes for the best tone , while the stradivarius came second with 39 votes . the majority ( 113 ) of the listeners misidentified the winning violin as the stradivarius . analysis of the treated wood revealed a reduction in density , accompanied by relatively little change in the speed of sound . according to this analysis , treatment improves the sound radiation ratio to the level of cold-climate wood considered to have superior resonance . in a double-blind test in 2012 published in the study '' player preferences among new and old violins '' , expert players could not distinguish old from new instruments by playing them for a short time in a small room . in an additional test , performed in a concert hall , one of the stradivarius violins placed first , but one of the participants stated that '' the audience in the concert hall were essentially equivocal on which instruments were better in each of the pair-wise instrument comparisons '' and '' i could tell slight differences in the instruments . but overall they were all great . none of them sounded substantially weaker than the others '' modern violins were rated as having better sound-carrying qualities and were preferred again in a study in 2017 . while many world-class soloists play violins by antonio stradivari , there are notable exceptions . for example , christian tetzlaff formerly played '' a quite famous strad '' , but switched to a violin made in 2002 by stefan-peter greiner . he states that the listener can not tell that his instrument is modern , and he regards it as excellent for bach and better than a stradivarius for '' the big romantic and 20th-century concertos . '' . theories and reproduction attempts . some maintain that the very best stradivari have unique superiorities . various attempts at explaining these supposed qualities have been undertaken , most results being unsuccessful or inconclusive . over the centuries , numerous theories have been presented – and debunked – including an assertion that the wood was salvaged from old cathedrals . a more modern theory attributes tree growth during a time of global low temperatures during the little ice age associated with unusually low solar activity of the maunder minimum , circa 1645 to 1750 , during which cooler temperatures throughout europe are believed to have caused stunted and slowed tree growth , resulting in unusually dense wood . further evidence for this '' little ice age theory '' comes from a simple examination of the dense growth rings in the wood used in stradivari 's instruments . two researchers – university of tennessee tree-ring scientist henri grissino-mayer and lloyd burckle , a columbia university climatologist – published their conclusions supporting the theory on increased wood density in the journal dendrochronologia . in 2008 , researchers from the leiden university medical center in the netherlands , announced further evidence that wood density caused the claimed high quality of these instruments . after examining the violins with x-rays , the researchers found that these violins all have extremely consistent density , with relatively low variation in the apparent growth patterns of the trees that produced this wood . yet another possible explanation is that the wood was sourced from the forests of northern croatia . this maple wood is known for its extreme density resulting from the slow growth caused by harsh croatian winters . croatian wood was traded by venetian merchants of the era , and is still used today by local luthiers and craftsfolk for musical instruments . some research points to wood preservatives used in that day as contributing to the resonant qualities . joseph nagyvary reveals that he has always held the belief that there are a wide range of chemicals that will improve the violin 's sound . in a 2009 study co-authored with renald guillemette and clifford spiegelman , nagyvary obtained shavings from a stradivarius violin and examined them , and analysis indicated they contained '' borax , fluorides , chromium and iron salts . '' texas a & m university . '' secrets of stradivarius ' unique violin sound revealed , professor says '' , science daily 25 january 2009 . he also found that the wood had decayed a little , to the extent that the filter plates in the pores between the wood 's component tracheids had rotted away , perhaps while the wood was stored in or under water in the venice lagoon before stradivarius used it . steven sirr , a radiologist , worked with researchers to perform a ct scan of a stradivari known as the '' betts '' . data regarding the differing densities of woods used were then used to create a reproduction instrument . . violins bearing the stradivari label . while only about 650 original stradivari instruments ( harps , guitars , violas , cellos , violins ) survive , thousands of violins have been made in tribute to stradivari , copying his model and bearing labels that read '' stradivarius '' on them . the presence of a stradivarius label does not confirm that the instrument is a genuine work of stradivari . stradivarius violins – encyclopedia smithsonian . retrieved 26 june 2013 . . preserving the stradivarius sound for future generations . according to a 2019 article in the new york times , the museo del violino in the city of cremona , italy is undertaking a landmark project to preserve the sound of stradivarius instruments . in january 2019 , four musicians will record an extensive set of scales and arpeggios in different techniques to showcase the sounds produced by two violins , a viola , and a cello . these recordings , known as the '' stradivarius sound bank '' , will be part of a permanent collection at the museo del violino that will allow future generations to hear stradivarius instruments . to facilitate these recordings , '' the city ’ s mayor , gianluca galimberti , implored cremona ’ s citizens to avoid any sudden and unnecessary sounds . '' . stradivari instruments . collection at the metropolitan museum of art , new york . file : '' the gould '' violin met dt669a.jpg '' gould '' violin ( 1693 ) file : '' the francesca '' violin met dp34.86.2.jpg '' francesca '' violin ( 1694 ) file : '' the antonius '' violin met dp105130.jpg '' antonius '' violin ( 1711 ) . references . further reading . how many strads ? , ernest n . doring , william lewis & son , chicago , 1945 violin iconography of antonio stradivari 1644–1737 , herbert k . goodkind , larchmont , new york , 1972 . . external links . a fourdoc ( short on-line documentary ) about a group of violin makers making a violin in the original spec of the maurin stradivarius in just five days what makes a stradivarius so great ? cozio.com online database of instruments by antonio stradivari . instruments by antonio stradivari on the mimo online database , website mimo-international.com . cheniston k . roland , discography ( incomplete ) of stradivarius recordings mark levine , '' medici of the meadowlands '' , the new york times 3 august 2003 herbert r . axelrod 's stravarius collection . chladni patterns for visualizing violin plate resonance patterns stradivari violin forms a detailed study of stradivari 's molds and drawings kept in the cremona museum . how stradivari and guarneri got their music discusses the chemical techniques used to figure out what makes these instruments ' unique sound . from the february 1 , 2007 issue of analytical chemistry '' the case of the missing stradivarius , '' an annotated historical novel by author emanuel e . garcia which investigates the secrets of stradivari violins and musical virtuosity . '' the violins of stradivarius '' by the hill family on the amati website . de : antonio stradivari stradivaris instrumente