Christian III of Denmark

childhood . christian was the eldest son of future king , frederick i of denmark , and anna of brandenburg . he was born at gottorf castle in schleswig which frederick i had made as a primary residence . in 1514 , when he was just ten years old , christian 's mother died . four years later , his father remarried to sophie of pomerania ( 1498–1568 ) . in 1523 , frederick i was elected king of denmark in the place of his nephew , king christian ii of denmark . the young prince christian 's first public service after his father became king was gaining the submission of copenhagen , which stood firm for the fugitive , king christian ii . as stadtholder of the duchies of holstein and schleswig in 1526 , and as viceroy of norway in 1529 , christian iii displayed considerable administrative ability . . religious views . christian 's earliest teacher , wolfgang von utenhof ( ca . 1495–1542 ) and his lutheran tutor , the military general johann rantzau ( 1492–1565 ) , were both zealous reformers who had an influence on the young prince . at their urging , while traveling in germany in 1521 , he made himself present at the diet of worms to hear martin luther speak . luther 's arguments intrigued him . the prince made no secret of his lutheran views . his outspokenness brought him into conflict , not only with the roman catholic dominated state council ( rigsraad ) , but also with his cautious and temporizing father . at his own court at schleswig , he did his best to introduce the protestant reformation , despite the opposition of the bishops . he made the lutheran church the state church of schleswig-holstein , with the church ordinance of 1528 . . early reign . after his father 's death , in 1533 , christian was proclaimed king at an assembly in rye , a town in eastern jutland , in 1534 . the rigsraad , dominated by roman catholic bishops and nobles , refused to accept duke christian as king and turned to count christopher of oldenburg in order to restore christian ii to the danish throne . christian ii had supported both the roman catholics and protestant reformers at various times . in opposition to king christian iii , count christopher was proclaimed regent at the ringsted assembly ( landsting ) , and at the scania assembly ( landsting ) on st liber 's hill ( sankt libers hög ) near lund cathedral . this resulted in a two-year civil war , known as the count 's feud ( grevens fejde ) from 1534–36 , between protestant and catholic forces . . civil war ( count 's feud ) . count christopher had the support of most of zealand , scania , the hanseatic league , and the small farmers of northern jutland and funen . christian iii found his support among the nobles of jutland . in 1534 , peasants under skipper clement ( c . 1484–1536 ) began an uprising in northern jutland , pillaging the holdings of lutheran nobles . an army of nobles and their vassals assembled at svendstrup and suffered a terrible defeat at the hands of the peasants . realizing his hold on the throne was in imminent danger , christian iii negotiated a deal with the hansa states which allowed him to send his trusted advisor johan rantzau north with an army of protestant german mercenaries . clement and his army fled north , taking refuge inside the walls of aalborg . in december , rantzau 's forces breached the walls and stormed the city . clement managed to escape , but was apprehended a few days later . he was tried and beheaded in 1535 . with jutland more or less secure , christian next focused on gaining control of scania . he appealed to the protestant swedish king gustav vasa for help in subduing the rebels . gustav immediately obliged by sending two armies to ravage central scania and halland . the peasants suffered a bloody defeat at loshult in scania . the swedes moved against helsingborg castle , which surrendered in january 1535 and was burned to the ground . rantzau moved his army to funen and defeated count christopher 's army at øksnebjerg on funen in june 1535 . count christopher 's forces held out in malmø and copenhagen until july 1536 when they surrendered after several months of siege by christian iii 's forces . with their capitulation , christian iii was firmly placed upon denmark 's throne , and the roman catholic forces in denmark were subdued . . after the war . a mutual confidence between a king who had conquered his kingdom and a people who had stood in arms against him was not attainable immediately . the circumstances under which christian iii ascended the throne exposed denmark to the danger of foreign domination . it was with the help of the gentry of the germanic duchies that christian had captured denmark . holstein and german noblemen had led his armies and directed his diplomacy . the first six years of christian iii 's reign were marked by a contest between the danish rigsraadet and the german counsellors , both of whom sought to rule through the king . though the danish party won a victory at the outset , by obtaining the insertion in the charter of provisions stipulating that only native-born danes should fill the highest dignities of the state , the king 's german counsellors continued paramount during his early reign . the triumph of christian iii would eventually bring about an end to roman catholic christianity in denmark , but roman catholics still controlled the council of state . christian iii ordered the arrest of three of the bishops on the state council by his german mercenaries ( 12 august 1536 ) . christian 's debt for the count 's feud was enormous and confiscating the church lands ( farmed by peasants who had been free from vassalage duties to the nobles ) enabled him to pay down the debt to his creditors . christian 's protestant policies led denmark toward the establishment of lutheranism as the danish national church ( folkekirke ) . this occurred officially on 30 october 1536 when the reconstituted state council adopted the kirchenordnung designed by german theologian johannes bugenhagen ( 1485–1558 ) , which outlined church organization , liturgy , and accepted religious practice . monasteries , nunneries , and priories , were closed and the property taken by the crown ( see chronicle of the expulsion of the grayfriars ) . vast tracts of land were handed out to the king 's supporters , the royal land was rapidly expanded from one-sixth of the national land before the religious reform to 60 % after the religious reform . . later reign . the dangers threatening christian iii from charles v , holy roman emperor and other kinsmen of the imprisoned christian ii convinced him of the necessity to lessen the discontent in the land by relying on danish magnates and nobles . at the high court ( herredag ) of copenhagen in 1542 , the nobility of denmark voted christian a twentieth part of all their property to pay off his heavy debt to german mercenary . the pivot of the foreign policy of christian iii was his alliance with the german protestant princes . this provided a counterpoise to the persistent hostility of charles v , who was determined to support the hereditary claims of his nieces , the daughters of christian ii , to the scandinavian kingdoms . war was declared against charles v in 1542 , and , though the german protestant princes proved faithless allies , the closing of the sound against dutch shipping proved such an effective weapon in king christian 's hand that the netherlands compelled charles v to make peace with denmark at the diet of speyer , on 23 may 1544 . . partition of holstein and schleswig . until this peace , christian iii also ruled the entire duchies of holstein and of schleswig in the name of his then still minor half-brothers john the elder ( hans den ældre ) and adolf . they determined their youngest brother frederick for a career as diocesan administrator of an ecclesiastical state within the holy roman empire . in 1551 frederick became administrator of the prince-bishopric of hildesheim , comprising ecclesiastical and secular power , however lacking secular power bishop of schleswig with the pertaining revenues from episcopal estates . in 1544 the elder three brothers partitioned holstein ( a fief of the holy roman empire ) and schleswig ( a danish fief ) . following negotiations between the brothers and the estates of the realm of the duchies , the revenues of the duchies were divided into three equal shares by assigning the revenues of particular areas and estate ( land ) to each of the three brothers , while other general revenues , such as taxes from towns and customs dues , were levied together but then shared among the brothers . the estates , whose revenues were assigned to the parties , made holstein and schleswig look like patchworks , technically inhibiting the emergence of separate new duchies . cf . carsten porskrog rasmussen , '' die dänischen könige als herzöge von schleswig und holstein '' , frauke witte and marion hartwig ( trls . ) , in : die fürsten des landes : herzöge und grafen von schleswig , holstein und lauenburg de slevigske hertuger ; german , carsten porskrog rasmussen ( ed . ) on behalf of the gesellschaft für schleswig-holsteinische geschichte , neumünster : wachholtz , 2008 , pp . 73-109 , here pp . 87seq . . final years . the foreign policy of king christian 's later days was regulated by peace following the treaty of speyer ( 1544 ) . he carefully avoided all foreign complications ; refused to participate in the schmalkaldic war of 1546 ; mediated between the emperor and saxony after the fall of maurice of saxony at the battle of sievershausen in 1553 . in 1549 , he began the building of landskrona citadel . he also rebuilt sønderborg castle , converting it from a fortress into a four-winged castle in the new renaissance syle , between 1549 and 1557 . otto norn , jørgen paulsen and jørgen slettebo , sønderborg slot . historie og bygning , g.e.c . gad forlag , 1963 . in february 1555 , he interceded successfully on the behalf of the english bible translator and bishop of exeter , miles coverdale ( 1488–1569 ) , who had been imprisoned for two and a half years by queen mary i of england . coverdale was then released and allowed to leave england . king christian iii died in 1559 on new year 's day at koldinghus , and was interred in roskilde cathedral in a funerary monument designed by flemish sculptor cornelis floris de vriendt ( 1514–1575 ) . christian 3 . king of denmark · norway 1534–59 ( danish kings and their history ) . memorials . in 1579 , king frederick ii commissioned dutch artists to erect a memorial at roskilde cathedral . king christian iii of denmark received an honorary stone at the walk of fame at landskrona which swedish king carl xvi gustaf inaugurated in 2013 . . children . christian married dorothea of saxe-lauenburg on 29 october 1525 at lauenburg/elbe . she was daughter of magnus i , duke of saxe-lauenburg and catherine of brunswick-wolfenbüttel . christian and dorothea were the parents of five children : anna of denmark ( 1532–1585 ) , married to augustus , elector of saxony . frederick ii of denmark ( 1534–1588 ) , succeeded as king of denmark and norway . magnus of livonia ( 1540–1583 ) , became duke of holstein , and later titular king of livonia . hans of denmark ( john the younger ; 1545–1622 ) , duke of schleswig-holstein-sonderburg as 'john ii' . dorothea of denmark ( 1546–1617 ) , married to william , duke of brunswick-lüneburg and mother of george , duke of brunswick-lüneburg .