Bhakti

bhagavata purana and navaratnamalika . the navaratnamalika ( garland of nine gems ) , nine forms of bhakti are listed : ( 1 ) śravaṇa ( listening to ancient texts ) , ( 2 ) kīrtana ( praying ) , ( 3 ) smaraṇa ( remembering teachings in ancient texts ) , ( 4 ) pāda-sevana ( service to the feet ) , ( 5 ) archana ( worshiping ) , ( 6 ) namaskar or vandana ( bowing to the divine ) , ( 7 ) dāsya ( service to the divine ) , ( 8 ) sākhyatva ( friendship with the divine ) , and ( 9 ) ātma-nivedana ( self-surrender to the divine ) . vijaya moorthy ( 2001 ) , romance of the raga , abhinav , , pages 72-73 ellen koskoff ( 2013 ) , the concise garland encyclopedia of world music , routledge , , pages 992-993 the bhagavata purana teaches nine similar facets of bhakti . bhagavata purana , 7.5.23-24 . bhavas . traditional hinduism speaks of five different bhāvas or '' affective essences '' . in this sense , bhāvas are different attitudes that a devotee takes according to his individual temperament to express his devotion towards god in some form . the different bhāvas are : śānta , placid love for god ; dāsya , the attitude of a servant ; sakhya , the attitude of a friend ; vātsalya , the attitude of a mother towards her child ; madhurya , the attitude of a woman towards her lover . several saints are known to have practiced these bhavas . the nineteenth century mystic , ramakrishna is said to have practiced these five bhavas . the attitude of hanuman towards lord rama is considered to be of dasya bhava . the attitude of arjuna and the shepherd boys of vrindavan towards krishna is regarded as sakhya bhava . the attitude of radha towards krishna is regarded as madhura bhava . the attitude of yashoda , who looked after krishna during his childhood is regarded as vatsalya bhava . caitanya-caritamrta mentions that mahaprabhu came to distribute the four spiritual sentiments of vraja loka : dasya , sakhya , vatsalya , and sringara . sringara is the relationship of the intimate love . related practices in other religions . in olden days , saints such as mirabai , soordas , narsinh mehta composed several bhajans that were a path towards bhakti for many , that are universally sung even today . a modern age saint , shri devendra ghia ( kaka ) has composed about 10,000 hymns ( a phenomenal task . ) these hymns are related to bhakti , knowledge , devotion , faith , introspection and honesty . devotionalism , similar to bhakti , states michael pasquier , has been a common form of religious activity in world religions throughout human history . michael pasquier ( 2011 ) , the encyclopedia of christian civilization , wiley-blackwell , , see article on devotionalism and devotional literature , it is found in christianity , l . d . nelson and russell r . dynes ( 1976 ) , the impact of devotionalism and attendance on ordinary and emergency helping behavior , journal for the scientific study of religion , vol . 15 , no . 1 , pages 47-59 islam , gj larson , india 's agony over religion : confronting diversity in teacher education , suny press , , page 116 roxanne leslie euben and muhammad qasim zaman ( 2009 ) , princeton readings in islamist thought , princeton university press , , pages 21-23 buddhism minoru kiyota ( 1985 ) , tathāgatagarbha thought : a basis of buddhist devotionalism in east asia , japanese journal of religious studies , vol . 12 , no . 2/3 , pages 207-231 pori park ( 2012 ) , devotionalism reclaimed : re-mapping sacred geography in contemporary korean buddhism , journal of korean religions , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pages 153-171 allan andrews ( 1993 ) , lay and monastic forms of pure land devotionalism : typology and history , numen , vol . 40 , no . 1 , pages 16-37 and judaism . anthony m . stevens-arroyo ( 1998 ) , the evolution of marian devotionalism within christianity and the ibero-mediterranean polity , journal for the scientific study of religion , vol . 37 , no . 1 , pages 50-73 . buddhism . bhakti ( called bhatti in pali language ) has been a common aspect of buddhism , where offerings and group prayers are made to images such the images of the buddha and the bodhisattvas , donald swearer ( 2003 ) , buddhism in the modern world : adaptations of an ancient tradition ( editors : heine and prebish ) , oxford university press , , pages 9-25 karen pechelis ( 2011 ) , the bloomsbury companion to hindu studies ( editor : jessica frazier ) , bloomsbury , , pages 109-112 or to deities such as wrathful deities . karel werner notes that bhakti has been a significant practice in theravada buddhism , and states , '' there can be no doubt that deep devotion or bhakti / bhatti does exist in buddhism and that it had its beginnings in the earliest days '' . karel werner ( 1995 ) , love divine : studies in bhakti and devotional mysticism , routledge , , pages 45-46 according to sri lankan scholar indumathie karunaratna , the meaning of bhatti changed throughout buddhist history , however . in early buddhism , such as in the text theragatha , bhatti had the meaning of 'faithful adherence to the buddhist religion ' , and was accompanied with knowledge . in later text tradition , however , the term developed the meaning of an advanced form of emotional devotion . examples of the latter include the veneration of buddha amitabha and those in the lotus sutra . this changed the meaning of buddhist devotion to a more person-centered sense , similar to a theist sense used in hindu scriptures . this sense of devotion was no longer connected with a belief in a religious system , and had little place for doubt , contradicting the early buddhist concept of saddhā . saddhā did not exclude reasonable doubt on the spiritual path , and was a step in reaching the final aim of developing wisdom , not an end in itself . in early buddhism , states sanath nanayakkara , the concept of taking refuge to the buddha had the meaning of taking the buddha as an ideal to live by , rather than the later sense of self-surrender . in later faith-oriented literature , such as the avadana , faith is given an important role in buddhist doctrine . nevertheless , faith ( śraddhā ) is discussed in different contexts than devotion ( bhakti ) . bhakti is often used disparagingly to describe acts of worship to deities , often seen as ineffective and improper for a buddhist . also , bhakti is clearly connected with a person as an object , whereas śraddhā is less connected with a person , and is more connected with truthfulness and truth . śraddhā focuses on ideas such as the working of karma and merit transfer . nevertheless , affective devotion is an important part of buddhist practice , not only in mahāyāna buddhism . according to winston king , a scholar on theravāda buddhism in myanmar , '' warm , personalized , emotional '' bhakti has been a part of the burmese buddhism tradition apart from the monastic and lay intellectuals . the buddha is treasured by the everyday devout buddhists , just like catholics treasure jesus . the orthodox teachers tend to restrain the devotion to the buddha , but to the devout buddhist populace , '' a very deeply devotional quality '' was and remains a part of the actual practice . this is observable , states king , in '' multitudes of pagoda worshippers of the buddha images '' and the offerings they make before the image and nowhere else . another example is the worship of the bodhisattvas and various deities in tibetan and other traditions of buddhism , including the so-called wrathful deities . . jainism . bhakti has been a prevalent ancient practice in various jaina sects , wherein learned tirthankara ( jina ) and human gurus have been venerated with offerings , songs and aarti prayers . john cort , jains in the world : religious values and ideology in india , oxford university press , isbn , pages 64-68 , 86-90 , 100-112 jainism participated in the bhakti school of medieval india , and has a rich tradition of bhakti literature ( stavan ) though these have been less studied than those of the hindu tradition . the avasyaka sutra of jains includes , among ethical duties for the devotee , the recitation of '' hymns of praise to the tirthankaras '' as the second obligatory action . it explains this bhakti as one of the means to destroy negative karma . according to paul dundas , such textual references to devotional activity suggests that bhakti was a necessary part of jainism from an early period . according to jeffery long , along with its strong focus on ethics and ascetic practices , the religiosity in jainism has had a strong tradition of bhakti or devotion just like their hindu neighbors . the jain community built ornate temples and prided in public devotion for its fordmakers , saints and teachers . abhisekha , festival prayers , community recitals and murti puja ( rituals before an image ) are examples of integrated bhakti in jain practice .