Richard Brautigan

early life . background . brautigan was born in tacoma , washington , the only child of bernard frederick '' ben '' brautigan jr . ( july 29 , 1908 – may 27 , 1994 ) , a factory worker and laborer , and lulu mary '' mary lou '' keho ( april 7 , 1911 – september 24 , 2005 ) , a waitress . in may 1934 , eight months before richard 's birth , bernard and mary lou separated . brautigan said that he met his biological father only twice , although after richard 's death , bernard was said to be unaware that richard was his child , saying '' he 's got the same last name , but why would they wait 45 to 50 years to tell me i 've got a son ? '' '' brautigan . '' upi news . october 27 , 1984 . in 1938 , brautigan and his mother began living with a man named arthur martin titland . the couple produced a daughter named barbara ann , born on may 1 , 1939 , in tacoma . brautigan claimed that he had a very traumatic experience when , at age six , his mother left him and his two-year-old sister unattended in a motel room in great falls , montana , for two days . on january 20 , 1943 , mary lou married a fry cook named robert geoffrey porterfield . the couple had a daughter named sandra jean , born april 1 , 1945 , at salem general hospital in salem , oregon . mary lou told brautigan that porterfield was his biological father , and brautigan began using richard gary porterfield as his name . mary lou separated from porterfield in 1946 , and married william david folston sr . on june 12 , 1950 . the couple produced a son named william david jr . , born on december 19 , 1950 , in eugene . folston was recalled as being a violent alcoholic , whom richard had seen abusing his mother . brautigan was raised in poverty ; he told his daughter stories of his mother sifting rat feces out of their supply of flour before making flour-and-water pancakes . brautigan , ianthe : you ca n't catch death : a daughter 's memoir . st . martin 's press , 2000 . brautigan 's family found it difficult to obtain food , and on some occasions they did not eat for days . the family lived on welfare and moved about the pacific northwest for nine years before settling in eugene , oregon in august 1944 . many of brautigan 's childhood experiences are included in the poems and stories that he wrote from as early as the age of 12 . his novel so the wind wo n't blow it all away is loosely based on childhood experiences , including an incident in which brautigan accidentally shot the brother of a close friend in the ear , injuring him only slightly . on september 12 , 1950 , brautigan enrolled at eugene high school , having graduated from woodrow wilson junior high school . he wrote for his high school newspaper , the eugene high school news . he also played on his school 's basketball team , and stood tall by the time of his graduation . on december 19 , 1952 , brautigan 's first published poem , '' the light '' , appeared in the school newspaper . brautigan graduated with honors from eugene high school on june 9 , 1953 . after graduation , he moved in with his best friend peter webster , and peter 's mother edna webster became a surrogate mother to brautigan . according to several accounts , brautigan stayed with webster for about a year before leaving for san francisco for the first time in august 1954 . he returned to oregon several times , apparently for lack of money . on december 14 , 1955 , brautigan was arrested for throwing a rock through a police station window , supposedly to be sent to prison and fed . he was arrested for disorderly conduct and fined 25 . he was then committed to the oregon state hospital on december 24 , 1955 , after police noticed patterns of erratic behavior . at the oregon state hospital brautigan was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and clinical depression , and was treated with electroconvulsive therapy 12 times . enzinna , wes , '' man underwater '' , harper 's magazine . december 2012 : 76–80 . while institutionalized , he began writing the god of the martians , a manuscript of 20 very short chapters totaling 600 words . the manuscript was sent to at least two editors but was rejected by both , and remains unpublished . ( a copy of the manuscript was recently discovered with the papers of the last of those editors , harry hooton . ) on february 19 , 1956 , brautigan was released from the hospital and briefly lived with his mother , stepfather , and siblings in eugene . he then left for san francisco , where he would spend most of the rest of his life except for periods in tokyo and montana . . career . in san francisco , brautigan sought to establish himself as a writer . he was known for handing out his poetry on the streets and performing at poetry clubs . in early 1956 , brautigan typed a three-page manuscript and sent it to the macmillan company for publication . the manuscript consisted of two pages with 14 poems and a page with the dedication '' for linda '' . of the poems , only '' stars '' and '' hey '' were titled . in a letter dated may 10 , 1956 , macmillan rejected the manuscript , stating , '' . there is no place where it will fit in '' . in 2005 , the x-ray book company published the manuscript as a chapbook titled desire in a bowl of potatoes . brautigan 's first poetry book publication was the return of the rivers ( 1957 ) , a single poem , followed by two collections of poetry : the galilee hitch-hiker ( 1958 ) and lay the marble tea ( 1959 ) . during the 1960s brautigan became involved in the burgeoning san francisco counterculture scene , often appearing as a performance poet at concerts and participating in the various activities of the diggers . he contributed several short pieces to be used as broadsides by the communication company . brautigan was also a writer for change , an underground newspaper created by ron loewinsohn . in the summer of 1961 , while camping in southern idaho with his wife and daughter , brautigan completed the novels a confederate general from big sur and trout fishing in america . little redfish lake a confederate general from big sur was his first published novel and met with little critical or commercial success . but when trout fishing in america was published in 1967 , brautigan was catapulted to international fame . literary critics labeled him the writer most representative of the emerging countercultural youth movement of the late 1960s , even though he was said to be contemptuous of hippies . trout fishing in america has sold over 4 million copies worldwide . during the 1960s brautigan published four collections of poetry as well as another novel , in watermelon sugar ( 1968 ) . in the spring of 1967 he was poet-in-residence at the california institute of technology . during this year , he published all watched over by machines of loving grace , a chapbook published by the communication company . it was printed in an edition of 1,500 copies and distributed free . from 1968 to 1970 brautigan had 23 short pieces published in rolling stone magazine . from late 1968 to february 1969 , brautigan recorded a spoken-word album for the beatles ' short-lived record-label , zapple . the label was shut down by allen klein before the recording could be released , but it was eventually released in 1970 on harvest records as listening to richard brautigan . in the 1970s brautigan experimented with literary genres . he published five novels ( the first of which , the abortion : an historical romance 1966 , had been written in the mid-1960s ) and a collection of short stories , revenge of the lawn ( 1971 ) . in 1974 the cowell press collected seven of his broadside poems into the book seven watermelon suns . the limited edition of ten copies included embossed color etchings by ellen meske . '' when the 1960s ended , he was the baby thrown out with the bath water , '' said his friend and fellow writer , thomas mcguane . '' he was a gentle , troubled , deeply odd guy . '' generally dismissed by literary critics and increasingly abandoned by his readers , brautigan 's popularity waned throughout the late 1970s and 1980s . his work remained popular in europe , however , as well as in japan , where brautigan visited several times . to his critics , brautigan was willfully naive . lawrence ferlinghetti said of him , '' as an editor i was always waiting for richard to grow up as a writer . it seems to me he was essentially a naïf , and i do n't think he cultivated that childishness , i think it came naturally . it was like he was much more in tune with the trout in america than with people . '' manso , peter ; mcclure , michael . '' brautigan 's wake . '' vanity fair , may 1985 : 62–68 , 112–116 . brautigan 's writings are characterized by a remarkable and humorous imagination . the permeation of inventive metaphors lent even his prose works the feeling of poetry . evident also are themes of zen buddhism like the duality of the past and the future and the impermanence of the present . zen buddhism and elements of the japanese culture can be found in his novel sombrero fallout : a japanese novel . brautigan 's last publication before his death in 1984 was his novel so the wind wo n't blow it all away , published in 1982 . the edna webster collection of undiscovered writings was published in 1999 . this collection of writings was gifted by a twenty-one year old richard brautigan to edna webster in 1955 , when he left oregon for san francisco . in 2002 , a proposed edition of brautigan 's collected poems was rejected by his estate . richard brautigan : essays on the writings and life ( mcfarland , 2007 ) , p . 188 . in november 2016 the french publisher le castor astral published a bilingual edition entitled tout ce que j'ai à déclarer : œuvre poétique complète . . personal life . on june 8 , 1957 , brautigan married virginia dionne alder in reno , nevada . the couple had one daughter together , ianthe elizabeth brautigan , born on march 25 , 1960 , in san francisco . brautigan 's alcoholism and depression caused him to become increasingly abusive and alder ended the relationship on december 24 , 1962 , though the divorce was not finalized until july 28 , 1970 . brautigan continued to reside in san francisco after the separation , while alder settled in manoa , hawaii , and became a feminism and an anti-vietnam war activist . brautigan remarried on december 1 , 1977 , to the japanese-born akiko yoshimura , whom he met in july 1976 while living in tokyo . the couple settled in pine creek , park county , montana , for two years . brautigan and yoshimura divorced in 1980 . brautigan had a relationship with a san francisco woman named marcia clay from 1981 to 1982 . he also pursued a brief relationship with janice meissner , a woman from the north beach community of san francisco . other relationships were with marcia pacaud , who appears on the cover of the pill versus the springhill mine disaster ; valerie estes , who appears on the cover of listening to richard brautigan ; and sherry vetter , who appears on the cover of revenge of the lawn . brautigan was an alcoholic throughout his adult life and suffered years of despair ; according to his daughter , he often mentioned suicide over a period of more than a decade before ending his life . in 1984 , at age 49 , richard brautigan had moved to bolinas , california , where he was living alone in a large , old house that he had bought with his earnings years earlier . he died of a self-inflicted . 44 magnum gunshot wound to the head . his decomposed body was found by robert yench , a friend and private investigator , on october 25 , 1984 . the body was found on the living room floor , in front of a large window that , though shrouded by trees , looked out over the pacific ocean . due to the decomposition of the body it is speculated that brautigan had ended his life over a month earlier , on september 16 , 1984 , days after talking to friend marcia clay on the telephone ( neighbors heard a loud noise that sunday while watching an nfl game ) . brautigan was survived by his parents , both ex-wives , and his daughter ianthe . according to michael caines , writing in the times literary supplement , the story that brautigan left a suicide note that simply read : '' messy , is n't it ? '' is apocryphal . ianthe brautigan has confirmed that her father did not leave such a message . caines , michael . my richard brautigan mistake . in his times literary supplement blog , september 25 , 2012 . brautigan once wrote , '' all of us have a place in history . mine is clouds . '' . legacy . because brautigan frequently wrote in first-person and included locations and events with which he is associated , readers might assume his work is autobiographical . writing in 1972 , long island university professor terrence malley points out that '' brautigan 's books are for the most part both directly autobiographical and curiously elusive . it 's usually difficult to separate confession from whimsy in brautigan 's writing '' ( 18 ) . malley , terence . richard brautigan . writers for the seventies . new york : warner paperback library , 1972 several later authors have cited brautigan as an influence , including haruki murakami , w . p . kinsella , christopher moore and sarah hall . the library for unpublished works envisioned by brautigan in his novel the abortion was housed at the brautigan library in burlington , vermont , until 1995 when it was moved to the nearby fletcher free library where it remained until 2005 . although there were plans to move it to the presidio branch of the san francisco public library , these never materialized . however , after an agreement was made between brautigan 's daughter , ianthe brautigan , and the clark county historical museum ( in vancouver , washington ) , the brautigan library was moved to the museum in 2010 . this american life podcast 664 , december 28 , 2018 kumquat meringue was a literary journal published in rockford , illinois dedicated to the memory and work of brautigan . saltpeter , a london-based production company , launched an international creative society , the brautigan book club ( bbc ) , which uses brautigan and his work as a creative jumping off point . , saltpeter was developing the world premiere of '' the brautigan opera '' developed from tonseisha – the man who abandoned the world , a play by los angeles screenwriter erik patterson . the industrial rock band machines of loving grace took its name from one of brautigan 's poems . the album boo , forever by indie rock band field guides takes its title from the brautigan poem of the same name . john markoff titled his 2015 book machines of loving grace : the quest for common ground between humans and robots . trout fishing in america is a musical duo which performs folk rock and children 's music . neko case based her song '' margaret vs . pauline '' on the female characters of in watermelon sugar . the band b-flower is named after richard brautigan , being a shortened version of '' brautigan flower '' . they also reference his work in songs such as '' the eternal 59th second '' ( titled after a line in '' trout fishing in america '' ) . the lovely eggs praise brautigan in their song '' have you ever heard a digital accordion ? '' . the song '' brought again '' by atlanta band '' insane jane '' on their 1993 album '' each finger '' is a reference to brautigan . the boo radleys ' song '' boo forever '' , released in 1992 , was written about brautigan and songwriter martin carr released a solo album , all watched over by machines of loving grace , in 2004 . the documentarian adam curtis produced a series of films for the bbc about the effect of computers on society called all watched over by machines of loving grace . in march 1994 , a teenager named peter eastman jr . from carpinteria , california legally changed his name to trout fishing in america , and now teaches english at waseda university in japan . the short story 'your clothes are dead ' by dave mckean , included in a collection of short comics called pictures that tick , is about a meeting provoked by memories of , and buying a copy of , brautigan 's the abortion : an historical romance . brautigan 's daughter , ianthe elizabeth brautigan , describes her memories of her father in her book you ca n't catch death ( 2000 ) . in march 2018 , poet francis daulerio published '' please plant this book '' – a reinterpretation of and homage to brautigan 's book of the same name on its 50th anniversary . the book contained seeds to be planted , packed in sleeves which carry poems by daulerio and illustrations by scott hutchison . profits from the book were to go to the american foundation for suicide prevention . hutchison took his own life in may 2018 , and in september an expanded version of the book was published , after the original edition had sold out . the book contains a foreword by ianthe brautigan and an afterword by scottish poet michael pedersen . the music video for kat meoz 's '' here i wait '' directed by kansas bowling recreates brautigan 's book covers and features the only footage in existence of the actual willard which inspired willard and his bowling trophies : a perverse mystery . brautigan is mentioned in the song '' i like the way you walk '' by the donkeys from the 2011 album , born with stripes and also by shawn mullins in '' twin rocks , oregon '' . works published . references . further reading . boyer , jay – 'richard brautigan ' , boise state university , boise , idaho , 1987 , boise state university western writers series chénetier marc – 'richard brautigan ' , methuen & co , london , new york , 1983 . ( pbk ) chénetier , marc . 'richard brautigan , écriveur : notes d'un ouvre-bôites critique ' caliban ( toulouse ) 1 ( 1975 ) , pp 16–31 _________ 'harmoniques sur l'irrespect litteraire : boris vian et richard brautigan ' stanford french review , 1 , 2 ( fall 1977 ) pp . & nbsp ; 243 – 59 . clayton , john . 'richard brautigan : the politics of woodstock ' new american review , 11 ( new york : simon & schuster , 1971 ) pp . & nbsp ; 56 – 68 . critique : studies in modern fiction , 16 , 1 ( minneapolis , minn . , 1974 ) richard brautigan special issue . loewinsohn , ron . 'after the ( mimeographed ) revolution ' . tri-quarterly ( spring 1970 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 221 – 36 . malley , terence . richard brautigan . writers for the seventies . new york : warner paperback library , 1972 meltzer , david ( ed . ) . in the san francisco poets , pp . & nbsp ; 1–7 , 293–7 . new york : ballantine , 1971 pétillon , pierre-yves , in la grand-route , pp . & nbsp ; 160 – 8 , 236 . paris : seuil , 1970 putz , manfed . in the story of identity , pp . & nbsp ; 105 – 29 . stuttgart : metzler , 1979 schmitz , neil . 'richard brautigan and the modern pastoral ' modern fiction studies ( spring 1973 ) pp . & nbsp ; 109 – 25 . stevick , philip . 'scherhezade runs out of plots , goes on talking , the king , puzzled , listens ' . tri-quarterly ( winter 1973 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 332 – 62 . swigart , rob . 'review of still life with woodpecker by tom robbins and the tokyo – montana express by richard brautigan ' . american book review , 3 , 3 ( march – april 1981 ) . p . 14 . tanner , tony . in city of words , pp . & nbsp ; 393 , 406–15 . new york : harper & row , 1971 . external links . '' brautigan bibliography and archive : a bio-bibliographical archive for richard brautigan , his life , and writings . '' '' richard brautigan ( 1935–1984 ) '' from poetry foundation