Saltaire

history . saltaire was built in 1851 by titus salt , a leading industrialist in the yorkshire woollen industry . the name of the village is a combination of the founder 's surname and the name of the river . salt moved his business ( five separate mills ) from bradford to this site near shipley to arrange his workers and to site his large textile mill by the leeds and liverpool canal and the railway . salt employed the local architects francis lockwood and richard mawson . similar , but considerably smaller , projects had also been started around the same time by edward akroyd at copley and by henry ripley at ripley ville . the cotton mill village of new lanark , which is also a world heritage site , was founded by david dale in 1786 . salt built neat stone houses for his workers ( much better than the slums of bradford ) , wash-houses with tap water , bath-houses , a hospital and an institute for recreation and education , with a library , a reading room , a concert hall , billiard room , science laboratory and a gymnasium . the village had a school for the children of the workers , almshouses , allotments , a park and a boathouse . recreational initiatives were also encouraged such as the establishment of a drum and fife band for school age boys and a brass band , precursor of today 's hammonds saltaire band , for men of the village . with the combination of quality housing , employment , recreation , educational facilities and social services the model town represented a landmark example of enlightened 19th century urban planning . bell , c . and r . ( 1972 ) city fathers : the early history of town planning in britain , penguin , harmondsworth cherry , g . ( 1979 ) 'the town planning movement and the late victorian city ' , transactions of the institute of british geographers , new series , vol . 4 , no . 2 , pp . 306–319 in october 1872 , saltaire , along with dean clough mill in halifax , were featured highlights of the japanese government 's iwakura mission tour of modern industrial britain . sir titus died in 1876 and was interred in the mausoleum adjacent to the congregational church . when sir titus salt 's son , titus salt junior , died , saltaire was taken over by a partnership which included sir james roberts from haworth . sir james roberts had worked in wool mills since the age of eleven . he had significant business interests in russia , and spoke russian language . roberts came to own saltaire , but chose to invest his money heavily in russia , losing some of his fortune in the russian revolution . he endowed a chair of russian at leeds university and bought the brontë 's haworth parsonage for the nation . he is mentioned in t . s . eliot 's the waste land . roberts is buried at fairlight , east sussex . his legacy can still be seen in saltaire in the park to the north of the river , which he named roberts park after his son when he gave it to bradford council in 1920 . . saltaire today . in december 2001 , saltaire was designated a world heritage site by unesco . this means that the government has a duty to protect the site . the buildings belonging to the model village are individually listed , with the highest level of protection given to the congregational church ( since 1972 saltaire united reformed church ) which is listed grade i . the village has survived remarkably complete , but further protection is needed as the village is blighted by traffic through the aire valley , an important east-west route . a bypass is proposed to relieve traffic pressure . roberts park , on the north side of the river , suffered from neglect and vandalism but has been restored by bradford council . in july 2014 it was announced that planning officers had compiled a list of replacement front doors that were deemed to be '' not in keeping with the buildings ' historic status . '' saltaire is a conservation area . victoria hall ( originally the saltaire institute ) is used for meetings , community events and concerts , and houses a wurlitzer theatre pipe organ . the village is served by saltaire railway station . the saltaire festival , which first took place in 2003 to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the foundation of saltaire , is held every year over eleven days in september . the saltaire arts trail is a visual arts festival that takes place each may . its public events include art exhibitions , children 's activities , a makers fair , and open houses where residents open their homes which become temporary art galleries . politically , saltaire is part of the shipley electoral ward of the city of bradford , and part of the parliamentary constituency of shipley , currently represented by philip davies of the conservatives . from 1999 to 2005 , parliamentarians from three chambers , chris leslie mp in the house of commons , lord wallace of saltaire in the house of lords and richard corbett mep in the european parliament , all lived in saltaire . proposed bypass . saltaire is surrounded by a buffer zone established to protect the context of the world heritage site . concerns have been raised over plans announced by bradford council and action airedale to site a bypass through the buffer zone to either side of the world heritage site and to tunnel beneath the village . facts on the proposed bypass . saltaire village within sight of the mill , the tunnel would follow the line of the railway and exit behind the united reformed church . google maps with proposed tunnel and protected areas . as it would pass alongside the leeds and liverpool canal , it could impact on this conservation area . the route would impact on an ancient semi-natural woodland and the woodland garden of remembrance at nab wood cemetery . . salts mill today . salts mill closed as a textile mill in february 1986 , and jonathan silver bought it the following year and began renovating it . today it houses a mixture of business , commerce , leisure and residential use . in the main mill building are : the 1853 art gallery : several large rooms given over to the works of the bradford-born artist david hockney : including paintings , drawings , photomontages and stage sets . industrial companies including the electronics manufacturer arris international ( formerly pace plc ) . various shops . in 2006 there are shops selling books , art supplies , jewellery , outdoor wear , antiques , suits , bicycles and housewares ; the last includes pieces by internationally known designers such as alvar aalto and philippe starck . restaurants and cafes . the '' new mill '' , on the other side of the canal , is divided between offices for the local national health service trusts and residential flats . media . the village has been used as a location for films and tv film footage of saltaire and the nearby shipley glen tramway in 1914 is held by the yorkshire film archive . '' shipley glen ( 1914 ) '' , yorkshire film archive . retrieved 4 april 2020 a two minute short clip showing workers leaving salt 's mill on 24 july 1900 is held by the british film institute . 2002 a is for acid ( tv film starring martin clunes ) 2009 spanish flu : the forgotten fallen ( bbc tv television drama ) 2011 antiques roadshow ( bbc tv series ) '' saltaire 1 , episode 9 of 19 '' , antiques roadshow , bbc tv . retrieved 4 april 2020 '' saltaire 2 , episode 9 of 19 '' , antiques roadshow , bbc tv . retrieved 4 april 2020 2013 peaky blinders ( bbc tv series ) 2014 the hunter 's prayer ( film ) 2015 an inspector calls ( bbc tv movie ) black work ( itv tv series ) countryfile , 25 may 2015 ( bbc tv series ) 2017 the hunter 's prayer ( film starring sam worthington ) ghost stories ( film directed by jeremy dyson ) 2018 funny cow ( film starring maxine peake ) the abc murders ( bbc tv series starring john malkovich ) 2019 the english game ( netflix series written by julian fellowes ) 2020 countryfile , 13 december 2020 ( bbc tv series ) . notable residents . notable past residents of saltaire include : martha brown ( servant to the brontë family ) arthur raistrick ( geologist and archaeologist ) tony richardson ( film director and producer ) titus salt ( businessman and founder of saltaire ) jonathan silver ( entrepreneur and owner of salt 's mill ) marie studholme ( actor and singer known for victorian and edwardian musical comedy ) abraham broadbent ( successful victorian sculptor ) . photographs . file : saltaire victoria hall 1.jpg victoria hall , saltaire village file : saltaire salts mill.jpg salts mill file : salts mill.jpeg salts mill and river aire file : salts mill 2.jpg salts mill congregational church - saltaire - inside.jpg inside of the congregational church