Heritage railway

definition . the british office of rail and road defines heritage railways as follows : . 'lines of local interest ' , museum railways or tourist railways that have retained or assumed the character and appearance and operating practices of railways of former times . several lines that operate in isolation provide genuine transport facilities , providing community links . most lines constitute tourist or educational attractions in their own right . much of the rolling stock and other equipment used on these systems is original and is of historic value in its own right . many systems aim to replicate both the look and operating practices of historic former railways companies . . infrastructure . heritage railway lines have historic rail infrastructure which has been substituted ( or made obsolete ) in modern rail systems . historical installations , such as hand-operated points , water cranes , and rails fastened with hand-hammered rail spikes , are characteristic features of heritage lines . unlike tourist railways , which primarily carry tourists and have modern installations and vehicles , heritage-line infrastructure creates views and soundscapes of the past in operation . operation . due to a lack of modern technology or the desire for historical accuracy , railway operations can be handled with traditional practices such as the use of tokens . heritage infrastructure and operations often require the assignment of roles , based on historical occupations , to the railway staff . some , or all , staff and volunteers , including station masters and signalmen , sometimes wearing period-appropriate attire , can be seen on some heritage railways . most heritage railways use heritage rolling stock , although modern rail vehicles can be used to showcase railway scenes with historical-line infrastructure . cost . while some heritage railways are profitable tourist attractions , many are not-for-profit entities ; some of the latter depend on enthusiastic volunteers for upkeep and operations to supplement revenue from traffic and visitors . still other heritage railways offer a viable public-transit option , and can maintain operations with revenue from regular riders or government subsidies . development . children 's railways . image : sarganska osmica 2.jpg thumb alt steam passenger train on a winding , mountainous switchback steam train on šargan eight children 's railways are extracurricular educational institutions where children and teenagers learn about railway work ; they are often functional , passenger-carrying narrow-gauge rail lines . the railways developed in the ussr during the soviet era . many were called '' pioneer railways '' , after the pioneer movement . the first children 's railway opened in moscow children 's railways : gorky park , moscow in 1932 and , at the breakup of the ussr , 52 children 's railways existed in the country . although the fall of communist governments has led to the closure of some , preserved children 's railways are still functioning in post-soviet states and eastern bloc . many children 's railways were built on parkland in urban areas . unlike many industrial areas typically served by a narrow-gauge railway , parks were free of redevelopment . child volunteers and socialist fiscal policy enabled the existence of many of these railways . children 's railways which still carry traffic have often retained their original infrastructure and rolling stock , including vintage steam locomotives ; budapest children 's railways website : rolling stock košice children 's railways some have acquired heritage vehicles from other railways . examples of children 's railways with steam locomotives include the dresden park railway in germany ; the gyermekvasút in budapest ; the park railway maltanka in poznań ; the košice children 's railway in slovakia , and the gauge steam railway on the grounds of st nicholas ' school in merstham , surrey , which the children help operate with assistance from the east surrey 16mm group and other volunteers . the only british children 's railway that is operational in 2014 helps keep the school 's railway running , and puts on a number of steam and model train shows at that school . mountain railways . creating passages for trains up steep hills and through mountain regions offers many obstacles which call for technical solutions . steep grade railway technologies and extensive tunneling may be employed . the use of narrow gauge allows tighter curves in the track , and offers a smaller structure gauge and tunnel size . at high altitudes , construction and logistical difficulties , limited urban development and demand for transport and special rolling-stock requirements have left many mountain railways unmodernized . the engineering feats of past railway builders and views of pristine mountain scenes have made many railways in mountainous areas profitable tourist attractions . pit railways . pit railways have been in operation in underground mines all over the world . small rail vehicles transport ore , waste rock , and workers through narrow tunnels . sometimes trains were the sole mode of transport in the passages between the work sites and the mine entrance . the railway 's loading gauge often dictated the cross-section of passages to be dug . at many mining sites , pit railways have been abandoned due to mine closure or adoption of new transportation equipment . some show mines have a vintage pit railway and offer mantrip rides into the mine . underground railways . the metro 1 ( officially the millennium underground railway or m1 ) , built from 1894 to 1896 , is the oldest line of the budapest metro system and the second-oldest underground railway in the world . kogan page : europe review 2003/2004 , fifth edition , wolden publishing ltd , 2003 , page 174 the m1 underwent major reconstruction during the 1980s and 1990s , and line 1 now serves eight original stations whose original appearance has been preserved . in 2002 , the line was listed as a unesco world heritage site . in the deák ferenc square concourse 's millennium underground museum , many other artifacts of the metro 's early history may be seen . around the world . the first heritage railway to be rescued and run entirely by volunteers was the talyllyn railway in wales . this narrow-gauge line , taken over by a group of enthusiasts in 1950 , was the beginning of the preservation movement worldwide . argentina . image : tren a las nubes cruzando viaducto la polvorilla.jpg thumb alt orange , yellow and white train crossing a ravine tren a las nubes ( train to the clouds ) crossing the polvorilla viaduct in salta province la trochita ( officially viejo expreso patagónico , the old patagonian express ) was declared a national historic monument by the government of argentina in 1999 . 'el kavanagh , entre los protegidos ' , clarín , 1999-04-23 ( spanish ) trains on the patagonian narrow-gauge railway use steam locomotives . the railway runs through the foothills of the andes between esquel and el maitén in chubut province and ingeniero jacobacci in río negro province . in southern argentina , the train of the end of the world to the tierra del fuego national park is considered the world 's southernmost functioning railway . heritage railway operations started in 1994 , after restoration of the old ( narrow-gauge ) steam railway . in salta province in northeastern argentina , the tren a las nubes ( train to the clouds ) runs along of track in what is one of the highest railways in the world . the line has 29 bridges , 21 tunnels , 13 viaducts , two spirals and two zigzags , and its highest point is above sea level . in the misiones province , more precisely in the iguazú national park , is the ecological train of the forest . with a speed below 20 km per hour to avoid interfering with wildlife and the formations are propelled to liquefied petroleum gas ( lpg ) , a non-polluting fuel . the villa elisa historic train ( operated by ferroclub central entrerriano ) runs steam trains between the cities of villa elisa and caseros in entre ríos province , covering tren turístico de villa elisa on girasol hostería in 120 minutes . '' 15 trenes turísticos de la argentina '' , clarín , 24 may 2015 . australia . the world 's second most preserved railway , and the first outside the united kingdom , was australia 's puffing billy railway . this railway operates on 15 miles ( 24 km ) of track , with much of its original rolling stock built as early as 1898 . just about over half of australia 's heritage lines are operated by narrow gauge tank engines , much like the narrow gauge lines of the united kingdom . canada . . finland . image : porvoon asema.jpg thumb alt blue-and-yellow railbus at a rural station preserved railbus at the porvoo railway station on the finnish state-owned rail network , the section between olli and porvoo is a dedicated museum line . in southern finland , it is the only line with many structural details abandoned by the rest of the network which regularly carries passenger traffic . wooden sleepers , gravel ballast and low rail weight with no overhead catenary make it uniquely historical . finnish railway network statement 2014 along the line , the hinthaara railway station and the porvoo railway station area are included in the national board of antiquities ' inventory of cultural environments of national significance in finland . also on the list is scenery in the porvoonjoki valley , through which the line passes . the national board of antiquities ' inventory of built cultural environments of national significance in finland . in finnish the jokioinen museum railway is a stretch of preserved narrow-gauge railway between humppila and jokioinen . nykarleby järnväg is a stretch of rebuilt narrow-gauge railway on the bank of the old kovjoki–nykarleby line . the national board of antiquities ' inventory of built cultural environments of national significance in finland . in finnish . india . of the mountain railways of india , the darjeeling himalayan , nilgiri mountain and kalka–shimla railways have been collectively designated as a unesco world heritage site . to meet world heritage criteria , the sites must retain some of their traditional infrastructure and culture . slovakia . the čierny hron railway is a narrow-gauge railway in central slovakia , established in the first decade of the 20th century and operating primarily as a freight railway for the local logging industry . from the late 1920s to the early 1960s , it also offered passenger transport between the villages of hronec and čierny balog . the railway became czechoslovakia 's most extensive forest railway network . after its closure in 1982 , it received heritage status and was restored during the following decade . since 1992 , it has been one of slovakia 's official heritage railways and is a key regional tourist attraction . the historical logging switchback railway in vychylovka is a heritage railway in north-central slovakia , originally built to serve the logging industry in the orava and kysuce regions . despite a closure and dissasembly of most of its original network during the early 1970s , its surviving lines and branches have been ( or are being ) restored . the railway is owned and operated by the museum of kysuce , with a line open to tourists for sightseeing . united kingdom . in britain , heritage railways are often railway lines which were run as commercial railways but were no longer needed ( or closed down ) and were taken over or re-opened by volunteers or non-profit organisations . the large number of heritage railways in the uk is due in part to the closure of many minor lines during the 1960s ' beeching cuts , and they were relatively easy to revive . there are between 100 and 150 heritage railways in the united kingdom . a typical british heritage railway will use steam locomotives and original rolling stock to create a period atmosphere , although some are concentrating on diesel and electric traction to re-create the post-steam era . many run seasonally on partial routes , unconnected to a larger network ( or railway ) , and charge high fares in comparison with transit services ; as a result , they focus on the tourist and leisure markets . during the 1990s and 2000s , however , some heritage railways aimed to provide local transportation and extend their running seasons to carry commercial passenger traffic . the first standard-gauge line to be preserved ( not a victim of beeching ) was the middleton railway ; the second , and the first to carry passengers , was the bluebell railway . not-for-profit heritage railways differ in their quantity of service and some lines see traffic only on summer weekends . the more successful , such as the severn valley railway and the north yorkshire moors railway , may have up to five or six steam locomotives and operate a four-train service daily ; smaller railways may run daily throughout the summer with only one steam locomotive . the great central railway , the only preserved british main line with a double track , can operate over 50 trains on a busy timetable day . after the privatisation of main-line railways , the line between not-for-profit heritage railways and for-profit branch lines may be blurred . the romney , hythe and dymchurch railway is an example of a commercial line run as a heritage operation and to provide local transportation , and the severn valley railway has operated a few goods trains commercially . a number of heritage railway lines are regularly used by commercial freight operators . since the bluebell railway reopened to traffic in 1960 , the definition of private standard gauge railways in the united kingdom as preserved railways has evolved as the number of projects and their length , operating days and function have changed . the situation is further muddied by large variations in ownership-company structure , rolling stock and other assets . unlike community railways , tourist railways in the uk are vertical integration ( although those operating mainly as charities separate their charitable and non-charitable activities for accounting purposes ) . united states . heritage railways are known in the united states as tourist , historic , or scenic railroads . most are remnants of original railroads , and some are reconstructed after having been scrapped . some heritage railways preserve entire railroads in their original state using original structures , track , and motive power . examples of heritage railroads in the us by preservation type : ; remnant durango and silverton railroad ( colorado ) cumbres and toltec scenic railroad ( colorado and new mexico ) hocking valley scenic railway ( ohio ) heber valley railroad ( utah ) tennessee valley railroad museum ( tennessee ) ; reconstructed sumpter valley railway ( oregon ) tweetsie railroad ( north carolina ) virginia and truckee railroad ( nevada ) wiscasset , waterville and farmington railway ( maine ) ; original nevada northern railway ( nevada ) niles canyon railway ( california ) california western railroad ( california ) delaware and ulster railroad ( new york ) stewartstown railroad ( pennsylvania ) strasburg rail road ( pennsylvania ) ; national park related lines grand canyon railway ( arizona ) cuyahoga valley scenic railroad ( ohio ) mount hood railroad ( oregon ) golden spike national historical park ( utah ) some do not fit in the above categories , like the rio grande scenic railroad ( a subsidiary of the san luis and rio grande railroad ) . the sl & rg , primarily a freight operation on former denver and rio grande western railroad track , owns and operates a steam locomotive and a fleet of passenger cars ( most of which are painted in d & rgw colors ) . many heritage railways host living-history events such as annual reenactments of historic activities , and may have an archive or library of railroad-related materials . in popular culture . the preservation of the talyllyn railway was the inspiration for the 1953 ealing studios comedy the titfield thunderbolt . the film is centred on the preservation of a fictional somerset branch line from titfield to mallingford . filmed on the camerton branch in the summer of 1952 , the branch was lifted after production had finished . many preserved railways also served as a filming location for several production companies ; for example , the keighley and worth valley railway served as a filming location for the 1970 adaptation of the railway children . series three of survivors uses heritage railways to help reestablish transportation , communication and trade in post-apocalyptic england .