King's College, Cambridge

people associated with king 's . file : robertwalpole cropped cropped.jpg robert walpole , first prime minister of great britain file : mrjames1900.jpg m . r . james , scholar and ghost-story writer file : george santayana.jpg george santayana , philosopher file : e . m . forster von dora carrington , 1924-25.jpg e . m . forster , novelist file : keynes 1933 cropped.jpg john maynard keynes , economist file : rupert brooke q 71073.jpg rupert brooke , poet file : philip noel-baker 1942.jpg philip noel-baker , olympic medallist and nobel laureate in peace file : xu zhimo.jpg xu zhimo , poet file : blackett-large.jpg patrick blackett , nobel laureate in physics file : alan turing portré.jpg alan turing , mathematician and computer scientist file : frederick sanger2.jpg frederick sanger , double nobel laureate in chemistry file : salman rushdie 2012 shankbone-2.jpg salman rushdie , novelist file : stephen poliakoff.jpg stephen poliakoff , playwright and director file : mervyn king.jpg mervyn king , former governor of the bank of england file : davidbaddielnightingale2.jpg david baddiel , comedian file : zadie smith nbcc 2011 shankbone.jpg zadie smith , novelist once someone has been admitted to the college , he or she becomes a member for life . alumni of the college includes prime ministers , archbishops , presidents and academics . time published in 1999 a list of what it considered the most '' influential and important '' people of the twentieth century . in a list of one hundred names , king 's claimed two : alan turing and john maynard keynes who had been both students and fellows at the college . heads of state and government educated at king 's include the first prime minister of great britain , robert walpole . also in the 18th century alumni include the secretary of state charles townshend , 2nd viscount townshend ( turnip townshend ) , who was also known for his interest in agriculture and his role in the british agricultural revolution , the judge and lord chancellor charles pratt , 1st earl camden . historical figures include francis walsingham , spymaster to queen elizabeth . politicians educated at king 's include the former british home secretary charles clarke , the peer and chancellor of the university of cambridge david sainsbury , baron sainsbury of turville , and martin bell . in law , alumni include the barrister and vice-chancellor robert alexander , baron alexander of weedon , the former president of the british supreme court nicholas phillips , baron phillips of worth matravers ; and the judge of the general court of the court of justice of the european union geert de baere . alumni in religion include william thomas , the 16th-century protestant martyr john frith , the archbishop of canterbury john sumner , and richard cox , who served as chancellor of oxford before appointment as dean of westminster and eventually bishop of ely . notable alumni in literature and poetry include the authors zadie smith , salman rushdie , martin jacques , j . g . ballard and e . m . forster , the nobel prize winner patrick white , the poets rupert brooke , walter raleigh and xu zhimo , and the playwright stephen poliakoff . the ghost story writer and medievalist m . r . james spent much of his life at king 's as a student , fellow and provost . the author and translator of aristotle sir john harington is also an alumnus , and a benefactor of mankind for having invented the flush toilet . in the arts , alumni include the philosopher george santayana ; the historians benedict anderson , eric hobsbawm and tony judt ; composers george benjamin , judith weir ( master of the queen 's music ) , thomas ades , and julian anderson ; the original members of the grammy award-winning a cappella group king 's singers ; the folk musician john spiers ; the comedian david baddiel ; the model lily cole ; the tenor james gilchrist ; and the countertenor john whitworth . garry humphreys , john whitworth : celebrated countertenor , in the independent , 15 september 2013 , accessed 20 june 2020 in the sciences and social sciences , king 's alumni include the british sociologist anthony giddens , the physicist patrick blackett , the chemist frederick sanger , the psychologist edgar anstey , the palaeontologist richard fortey , the economist john craven , the political theorist john dunn , the engineer charles inglis , and the mathematician and eugenicist karl pearson . the governor of the bank of england mervyn king was also educated at king 's . the technology entrepreneur hermann hauser , of acorn and arm , studied postgraduate physics there . of the current fellows of king 's prominent fellows include whitehead and adams ' prize winner clément mouhot and the fellow of the royal society and clay research award winner mark gross ( mathematician ) . nobel laureates . there are eight nobel laureates who were either students or fellows of king 's : charles glover barkla was awarded the nobel prize in physics 1917 '' for his discovery of the characteristic röntgen radiation of the elements '' . patrick blackett , fellow of king 's , was awarded the nobel prize in physics 1948 '' for his development of the wilson cloud chamber method , and his discoveries therewith in the fields of nuclear physics and cosmic radiation '' . frederick sanger , fellow of king 's , was awarded the nobel prize in chemistry 1958 '' for his work on the structure of proteins , especially that of insulin '' . sanger was awarded his second nobel prize in chemistry in 1980 jointly with walter gilbert for '' their contributions concerning the determination of base sequences in nucleic acids '' . sanger is one of only four people to have won a nobel prize twice , and the only affiliate of the university of cambridge to have done so . philip noel-baker was awarded the nobel peace prize 1959 for work towards global disarmament . patrick white was awarded the nobel prize in literature 1973 '' for an epic and psychological narrative art which has introduced a new continent into literature '' . richard stone , fellow of king 's , was awarded the nobel memorial prize in economic sciences 1984 '' for having made fundamental contributions to the development of systems of national accounts and hence greatly improved the basis for empirical economic analysis '' . sydney brenner was awarded the nobel prize in physiology or medicine 2002 jointly with h . & nbsp ; robert horvitz and john e . & nbsp ; sulston '' for their discoveries concerning genetic regulation of organ development and programmed cell death '' . oliver hart was awarded the nobel memorial prize in economic sciences 2016 jointly with bengt holmstrom '' for their contributions to contract theory '' . . provosts . the head of king 's college is called the provost . the current provost , , is michael proctor , physicist and professor of astrophysical fluid dynamics at cambridge . visitor . the visitor of the college is the bishop of lincoln , king 's college statutes 2007 , s . p ( 1 ) . since 2011 christopher lowson . arms .