Sharpless epoxidation

catalyst structure . the structure of the catalyst is uncertain . regardless , all studies have concluded that the catalyst is a dimer of ti ( tartrate ) ( or ) 2 . the putative catalyst was determined using x-ray structural determinations of model complexes which have the necessary structural components to catalyze the sharpless epoxidation . . selectivity . the chirality of the product of a sharpless epoxidation is sometimes predicted with the following mnemonic . a rectangle is drawn around the double bond in the same plane as the carbons of the double bond ( the xy-plane ) , with the allylic alcohol in the bottom right corner and the other substituents in their appropriate corners . in this orientation , the ( − ) diester tartrate preferentially interacts with the top half of the molecule , and the ( + ) diester tartrate preferentially interacts with the bottom half of the molecule . this model seems to be valid despite substitution on the olefin . selectivity decreases with larger r 1 , but increases with larger r 2 and r 3 ( see introduction ) . however , this method incorrectly predicts the product of allylic 1,2-diols . . kinetic resolution . the sharpless epoxidation can also give kinetic resolution of a racemic mixture of secondary 2,3-epoxyalcohols . while the yield of a kinetic resolution process can not be higher than 50 % , the enantiomeric excess approaches 100 % in some reactions . . synthetic utility . the sharpless epoxidation is viable with a large range of primary and secondary alkenic alcohols . furthermore , with the exception noted above , a given dialkyl tartrate will preferentially add to the same face independent of the substitution on the alkene . to demonstrate the synthetic utility of the sharpless epoxidation , the sharpless group created synthetic intermediates of various natural products : methymycin , erythromycin , leukotriene c-1 , and ( + ) -disparlure . as one of the few highly enantioselective reactions during its time , many manipulations of the 2,3-epoxyalcohols have been developed . the sharpless epoxidation has been used for the total synthesis of various saccharides , terpenes , leukotrienes , pheromones , and antibiotics . the main drawback of this protocol is the necessity of the presence of an allylic alcohol . the jacobsen epoxidation , an alternative method to enantioselectively oxidise alkenes , overcomes this issue and tolerates a wider array of functional groups . background on epoxidation of allylic alcohols . early work showed that allylic alcohols give facial selectivity when using m-cpba as an oxidant . this selectivity was reversed when the allylic alcohol was acetylated . this finding leads to the conclusion that hydrogen bonding played a key role in selectivity and the following model was proposed . for cyclic allylic alcohols , greater selectivity is seen when the alcohol was locked in the pseudo equatorial position rather than the pseudo axial position . however , it was found that for metal catalyzed systems such as those based on vanadium , reaction rates were accelerated when the hydroxyl group was in the axial position by a factor of 34 . substrates which were locked in the pseudo equatorial position were shown to undergo oxidation to form the ene-one . in both cases of vanadium catalyzed epoxidations , the epoxidzed product showed excellent selectivity for the diastereomer . in the absence of hydrogen bonding , steric effects direct peroxide addition to the opposite face . however , perfluoric peracids are still able to hydrogen bond with protected alcohols and give normal selectivity with the hydrogen present on the peracid . although the presence of an allylic alcohol does lead to increased stereoselectivity , the rates of these reactions are slower than systems lacking alcohols . however , the reaction rates of substrates with a hydrogen bonding group are still faster than the equivalent protected substrates . this observation is attributed to a balance of two factors . the first is the stabilization of the transition state as a result of the hydrogen bonding . the second is the electron-withdrawing nature of the oxygen , which draws electron density away from the alkene , lowering its reactivity . acyclic allylic alcohols exhibit good selectivity as well . in these systems both a 1,2 ( steric interactions with vinyl ) and allylic strain are considered . it has been shown that a dihedral angle of 120 best directs substrates which hydrogen bond with the directing group . this geometry allows for the peroxide to be properly positioned , as well as to allow minimal donation from the c-c pi into the c-o sigma star . houk , k . n . ; paddon-row , m . n . ; rondan , n . g . ; wu , y . d . ; brown , f . k . ; spellmeyer , d . c . ; metz , j . t . ; li , y . ; loncharich , r . j . science , 1986 , 231 , 1108-1117 . this donation would lower the electron density of the alkene , and deactivate the reaction . however , vanadium complexes do not hydrogen bond with their substrates . instead they coordinate with the alcohol . this means that a dihedral angle of 40 allows for ideal position of the peroxide sigma star orbital . waldemar , a . ; wirth , t . accounts of chemical research , 1999 , 32.8 , 703-710 . in systems that hydrogen bond , a 1,3 strain plays a larger role because the required geometry forces any allylic substituents to have severe a 1,3 interactions , but avoids a 1,2 . this leads to syn addition of the resulting epoxide . in the vanadium case , the required geometry leads to severe a 1,2 interactions , but avoids a 1,3 , leading to formation of the epoxide anti to the directing group . vanadium catalyzed epoxidations have been shown to be very sensitive to the steric bulk of the vinyl group . allyl alcohols are effective directing groups for epoxidations in both cyclic and acyclic systems for substrates which show hydrogen bonding . however these reactions tend to have lower levels of selectivity . johnson , m . r . ; kishi , y . tetrahedron lett . , 1979 , 4347-4350 . while hydrogen bonding substrates give the same type of selectivity in allylic and homoallylic cases , the opposite is true of vanadium catalysts . a transition state proposed by mihelich shows that for these reactions , the driving force for selectivity is minimizing a 1,3 strain in a pseudo chair structure . the proposed transition state shows that the substrate will try to assume a conformation which minimizes the allyic strain . to do this , the least sterially bulky r group will rotate to assume the r4 position . although peracids and metal catalyzed expoidations show different selectivity in acyclic systems , they show relatively similar selectivity in cyclic systems for cyclic ring systems that are smaller seven or smaller or 10 or lager , similar patterns of selectivity are observed . however it has been shown that for medium-sized rings ( eight and nine ) peracid oxidizers show reverse selectivity , while vanadium catalyzed reactions continue to show formation of the syn epoxide . although it is the least reactive metal catalyst for epoxidations , vanadium is highly selective for alkenes with allylic alcohols . early work done by sharpless shows its preference for reacting with alkenes with allylic alcohols over more substituted electron dense alkenes . in this case , vanadium showed reverse regioselectivity from both m-cpba and the more reactive molybdenum species . although vanadium is generally less reactive than other metal complexes , in the presence of allylic alcohols , the rate of the reaction is accelerated beyond that of molybdenum , the most reactive metal for epoxidations . sharpless , k . b . ; michaelson , r . c . j . am . chem . soc . , 1973 , 95 ( 18 ) . see also . asymmetric catalytic oxidation juliá–colonna epoxidation . references . external links . sharpless asymmetric epoxidation reaction