1987 in literature

events . january 2 – golliwogs in enid blyton children 's books are replaced by the british publisher with gnomes after complaints of a racial offence implication . april – k . w . jeter coins the term '' steampunk '' in a letter published in locus ( magazine ) . june – virago press of london publishes down the road , worlds away , a collection of short stories ostensibly by rahila khan , a young muslim woman living in england . three weeks later , toby forward , an anglican clergyman , admits to writing them and the publisher withdraws the book . '' he , unlike the editors at virago , had grown up in precisely the kind of area and social conditions that the book described . although the book never claimed to be other than a work of fiction , the publishers destroyed the stock still in the warehouse and recalled all unsold copies from the bookshops , thus turning it into an expensive bibliographical rarity . '' july 31 – the united kingdom attorney general takes legal proceedings on security grounds against the london paper the daily telegraph to prevent it publishing details of the book spycatcher . on september 23 , an australian court lifts its ban on the book 's publication . august – a new building for the national library of new zealand in wellington opens . unknown dates tom wolfe is paid us 5 million for the film rights to his novel the bonfire of the vanities ( published in book format in october ) , a record fee to an author at this time . ian rankin 's knots and crosses , first of the inspector rebus detective novels set around edinburgh , is published in london . . new books . fiction . chinua achebe – anthills of the savannah peter ackroyd – chatterton ( shortlisted for booker prize 1987 ) douglas adams – dirk gently 's holistic detective agency martin amis – einstein 's monsters gilles archambault – l'obsédante obèse et autres agressions paul auster the new york trilogy in the country of last things iain banks consider phlebas ( as iain m . banks ) espedair street clive barker – weaveworld greg bear – the forge of god thomas berger – being invisible william boyd – the new confessions t.c . boyle – world 's end ( 1988 pen/faulkner award for fiction ) marion zimmer bradley – the firebrand truddi chase – when rabbit howls tom clancy – patriot games hugh cook the wordsmiths and the warguild the women and the warlords robin cook – outbreak bernard cornwell redcoat sharpe 's rifles robert crais – the monkey 's raincoat l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp – the incorporated knight jenny diski – rainforest jim dodge – not fade away roddy doyle – the commitments bret easton ellis – the rules of attraction james ellroy – black dahlia carlos fuentes – christopher unborn neil gaiman and dave mckean – violent cases ( graphic novel ) john gardner – no deals , mr . bond kaye gibbons – ellen foster ken grimwood – replay larry heinemann – paco 's story ( 1987 national book award for fiction ) tom holt – expecting someone taller josephine humphreys – rich in love dương thu hương – bên kia bờ ảo vọng ( beyond illusions ) john jakes – heaven and hell tahar ben jelloun – la nuit sacrée ( the sacred night ) garrison keillor – leaving home : a collection of lake wobegon stories jesse lee kercheval – the dogeater ungulani ba ka khosa – ualalapi stephen king misery the dark tower ii : the drawing of the three the tommyknockers the eyes of the dragon penelope lively – moon tiger ian mcewan – the child in time betty mahmoody – not without my daughter james a . michener – legacy alan moore and dave gibbons – watchmen ( graphic novel ) finola moorhead – remember the tarantella toni morrison – beloved ( 1988 pulitzer prize for fiction ) haruki murakami ( 村上 春樹 ) – norwegian wood ( ノルウェイの森 , noruwei no mori ) v . s . naipaul – the enigma of arrival silvina ocampo – y así sucesivamente ( stories ) michael ondaatje – in the skin of a lion robert b . parker – pale kings and princes gary paulsen – hatchet ellis peters – the hermit of eyton forest rosamunde pilcher – the shell seekers peter pohl – vi kallar honom anna terry pratchett equal rites mort paul quarrington – king leary edward rutherfurd – sarum josé saramago – baltasar and blimunda leonardo sciascia – porte aperte michael shea – polyphemus sidney sheldon – windmills of the gods lucius shepard – the jaguar hunter carol shields – swann : a mystery michael slade – ghoul danielle steel fine things kaleidoscope hồ anh thái – người và xe chạy dưới ánh trăng ( men and vehicles run in the moonlight ) scott turow – presumed innocent andrew vachss – strega mario vargas llosa – the storyteller ( el hablador ) gore vidal – empire barbara vine – a fatal inversion william t . vollmann – you bright and risen angels kurt vonnegut – bluebeard gene wolfe – the urth of the new sun tom wolfe – the bonfire of the vanities gamel woolsey ( posthumously ) – one way of love ( written 1930 ) roger zelazny – sign of chaos . children and young people . chris van allsburg – the z was zapped ( alphabet book ) tedd arnold – no jumping on the bed ! janice elliott – the king awakes ( first in the sword and the dream series ) anne fine – madame doubtfire willi glasauer – grüße aus der fremde ( greetings from the surreal ) julius lester – the tales of uncle remus : the adventures of brer rabbit bill peet – jethro and joel were a troll ruth thomas – the runaways theresa tomlinson – the flither pickers ( first in the against the tide trilogy ) audrey wood – heckedy peg jane yolen – owl moon . drama . nezihe araz – afife jale caryl churchill – serious money robert harling – steel magnolias liz lochhead – mary queen of scots got her head chopped off adam long , daniel singer and jess winfield – the complete works of william shakespeare ( abridged ) warren manzi – perfect crime yasmina reza – conversations après un enterrement ( conversations after a burial ) peter shaffer – lettice and lovage . non-fiction . claude-françois baudez & sydney picasso – lost cities of the maya allan bloom – the closing of the american mind david bohm – science , order , and creativity robert v . bruce – the launching of modern american science , 1846–1876 bruce chatwin – the songlines nien cheng – life and death in shanghai bill cosby – time flies andrea dworkin – intercourse sita ram goel – the calcutta quran petition c . z . guest – first garden ( approximate year – book undated ) robert hughes – the fatal shore paul kennedy – the rise and fall of the great powers : economic change and military conflict from 1500 to 2000 nicholas kenyon ( editor ) – authenticity and early music steven long – death without dignity salman rushdie – the jaguar smile : a nicaraguan journey randy shilts – and the band played on donald trump ( attrib . ) and tony schwartz – trump : the art of the deal peter wright – spycatcher . births . december 15 – mayra dias gomes , brazilian journalist and columnist unknown dates mina adampour , norwegian journalist , politician and activist of iranian origin katherine rundell , english children 's writer and academic brought up in zimbabwe and belgium . deaths . january 15 – george markstein , german-born english journalist and thriller writer ( kidney failure , born 1926 ) february 2 – alistair maclean , scottish thriller writer ( heart attack , born 1922 ) february 4 – wynford vaughan-thomas , welsh journalist and broadcaster ( born 1908 ) february 10 – william rose , american screenwriter ( born 1918 ) february 22 – andy warhol , american artist , director and writer ( cardiac arrhythmia , born 1928 ) march 4 – maria jolas ( maria mcdonald ) , american-born french publisher and campaigner ( born 1893 ) april 4 – c . l . moore , american science fiction author ( born 1911 ) april 11 – erskine caldwell , american novelist ( born 1903 ) may 13 – richard ellmann , american-born biographer ( born 1918 ) may 18 – heðin brú , faroese fiction writer and translator ( born 1901 ) may 30 – norman nicholson , english poet ( born 1914 ) june 6 – fulton mackay , scottish actor and playwright ( born 1922 ) june 7 – humberto costantini , argentinian writer ( cancer , born 1924 ) july 26 – tawfiq al-hakim , egyptian novelist and dramatist ( born 1898 ) september 1 – alan reid ( '' red fox '' ) , english-born australian journalist ( cancer , born 1914 ) september 25 – emlyn williams , welsh dramatist ( born 1905 ) september 30 – alfred bester , american science fiction writer ( born 1913 ) october 3 – jean anouilh , french dramatist ( born 1910 ) october 8 – roger lancelyn green , english biographer and children 's author ( born 1918 ) october 31 – joseph campbell , american author and mythology expert ( born 1904 ) november 29 – gwendolyn macewen , canadian poet ( alcohol-related , born 1941 ) december 1 – james baldwin , african american novelist ( stomach cancer , born 1924 ) december 17 – marguerite yourcenar , french novelist and essayist ( born 1903 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : joseph brodsky . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : jim sakkas , ilias c . j . dennis prize for poetry : lily brett , the auschwitz poems kenneth slessor prize for poetry : philip hodgins , blood and bone mary gilmore prize : jan owen , boy with telescope miles franklin award : glenda adams , dancing on coral . canada . see 1987 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : tahar ben jelloun , la nuit sacrée prix médicis french : pierre mertens , les éblouissements prix médicis international : antonio tabucchi , indian nocturne . united kingdom . booker prize : penelope lively , moon tiger carnegie medal for children 's literature : susan price , the ghost drum cholmondeley award : wendy cope , matthew sweeney , george szirtes eric gregory award : peter mcdonald , maura dooley , stephen knight , steve anthony , jill maughan , paul munden james tait black memorial prize for fiction : george mackay brown , the golden bird : two orkney stories james tait black memorial prize for biography : ruth dudley edwards , victor gollancz : a biography 1987 whitbread awards : christopher nolan , under the eye of the clock sunday express book of the year : brian moore , the colour of blood . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : david rivard , torque aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : howard nemerov american academy of arts and letters gold medal for belles lettres : jacques barzun frost medal : robert creeley / sterling brown national book critics circle award : to the making of the atomic bomb by richard rhodes national book award for fiction : to paco 's story by larry heinemann nebula award : pat murphy , the falling woman newbery medal for children 's literature : sid fleischman the whipping boy pen/faulkner award for fiction : to soldiers in hiding by richard wiley pulitzer prize for drama : august wilson , fences pulitzer prize for fiction : peter taylor , a summons to memphis pulitzer prize for poetry : rita dove , thomas and beulah whiting awards : : fiction : joan chase , pam durban , deborah eisenberg , alice mcdermott , david foster wallace : poetry : mark cox , michael ryan : nonfiction : mindy aloff , gretel ehrlich : plays : reinaldo povod . elsewhere . europe theatre prize : ariane mnouchkine , théâtre du soleil premio nadal : juan josé saer , la ocasión . references .