Laura Bozzo

biography . early life . bozzo was born in callao , peru to engineer miguel bozzo chirichignio and victoria luisa rotondo mendoza , both of italian , spanish , and quechua descent ; she holds italian citizenship . she studied law at san marcos university in lima , peru and at central university of venezuela in caracas , venezuela receiving degrees in law and political science there and teaching classes within such fields in various universities . in 1987 , she became the appointed officer of the instituto nacional de cultura and organized competitions to promote the conservation of the cultural heritage of peru . in 1992 , she became the regidora ( alderman ) of metropolitan lima . career . she began in television in 1994 with las mujeres tienen la palabra a feminist cutting program in rbc televisión . in 1997 , laura bozzo went to panamericana televisión and assumes the conduct of the reality show intimidades . a year later , bozzo was hired by américa televisión and launched laura en américa , this program was very popular in peru . televisa ( 2014-03-19 ) acerca de laura bozzo retrieved on march 08 , 2017 in 1998 , she organized the organization solidaridad de familia ( family solidarity ) as a charitable foundation to assist people from peru and other latin american nations with legal , medical , and psychological problems ; which has been under much criticism for increasing suspicion of being funded by former president alberto fujimori . in february 1998 , the american spanish-language broadcast network telemundo began broadcasting her show laura en américa on its affiliates . the show soon began to be shown all over latin america . similar in nature to the american jerry springer show , it routinely featured guests usually having troubles within their lives , including infidelity . usually , the show would expose evidence of wrongdoing by the suspect that the guest presents , leading to fighting between guests . the authenticity of the show has been questioned , given the unusually sensational subjects explored . by the end of the year , bozzo moved to miami , florida . 2006 , bozzo 's rat contract with telemundo expired after five years , so she moved her production to televisa ; production of laura en america ended in july 2006 . in october 2006 , bozzo appeared on the program ¿dónde estás corazón ? on the network antena 3 from spain , criticizing alejandro toledo for causing her arrest . just a few days before the one-year anniversary of her release from house arrest , laura bozzo was convicted of all the charges against her and was sentenced to four consecutive years in prison . laura later informed a local television station , canal 9 , that she planned to use a newly enacted law in her favor and sue the peruvian government . in january 2007 , bozzo attempted to enter the spanish tv market through spain 's telecinco , but once some executives saw pilots of the program , a proposal for a new bozzo show was canceled . on november 6 , 2007 , her new show laura en acción debuted on telemundo in the united states . however , in march 2008 , lawyer freddy escobar started an investigation about the possible illegal use of minors in her program , being exposed on tv to present fake cases of family sex violence . a scandal involving an underage woman who appeared on laura en acción caused the show to be canceled by peruvian network américa televisión , in which the show originally aired . telemundo stopped airing the series by the beginning of may 2008 . in june 2009 , laura bozzo made her television reappearance after her last talk show , laura en acción was cancelled on april 2008 . bozzo relocated herself in mexico and started working on many shows on televisa , the largest spanish-speaking television network in all the world , but then she went to tv azteca and hosted the talkshow laura de todos ( shortened from laura de todos : sin miedo a la verdad ) , for two years and a half . laura bozzo 's show aired on azteca 13 at 17:00 & nbsp ; hrs . ct in the country . the show was also televised in the united states , through azteca america at 20:00 & nbsp ; hrs . laura left the show after having differences with the executives of tv azteca . bozzo was replaced by the mexican television host rocío sánchez azuara with the return of the talk show cosas de la vida . laura bozzo returned to televisa . she signed a contract for five years with televisa to make a new show called laura herself and federico wilkins were the producers of laura . wilkins was fired after making up that laura 's boyfriend , argentinian singer christian suárez who is 24 & nbsp ; years her junior , was cheating on her with karina alvarez ; gabriel vasquez woodman took over the production . the talk show airs on canal de las estrellas network in mexico . the show premiered on january 24 , 2011 , at 16:00 & nbsp ; hrs the show airs for 1 & nbsp ; hour and 30 & nbsp ; minutes . ( ct ) , the show also airs on saturdays at 17 & nbsp ; hrs . the show 's premiere live in mexico was very successful with 18.9 & nbsp ; points in rating and 40.5 in share and on its second day the show reached 19.4 in rating beating its competition . laura started airing in the united states through telefutura ( now unimás ) at 7/6c pm competing with telemundo 's caso cerrado . laura bozzo llega a telefutura although the show was cancelled due to low ratings and other factors on april 2011 , telefutura aired laura again at 2pm/1pm central in october 10 , 2011 and since has become such a hit that it airs two hours a day starting at 11pm/10pm pacific . laura bozzo llega a telefutura ( revised ) . criticism . in september , 2013 , mexican social media ramped up criticisms against laura bozzo through twitter and facebook with the hashtags laurabozzofuerademexico and laurabozzomexiconotequiere , for using official state of mexico government helicopters during a telecast allegedly used for the benefit of her show in order to set dramatic staging for the tv audience , while deferring rescue labors during the relief efforts for hurricane manuel . criticism was sparked on televisa 's competitor , mvs networks , by mexican journalist and noted televisa detractor conflicto personal de aristegui vs televisa carmen aristegui acusa a televisa de estar detrás del ataque de alejandro puente carmen aristegui 's recount on the story , first published in the political journal proceso . this was followed by bozzo 's public contest of the allegations . a petition on change.org has been made by civil group '' creamos méxico a.c . '' to elicit her dismissal from mexican tv . '' televisa : ¡corran a bozzo ! necesitamos más y mejores espacios para educarnos y no para embrutecernos más '' , at change.org . personal life . bozzo married lawyer mario de la fuente in 1980 . the couple had two daughters , alejandra and victoria . after twenty years of marriage , they divorced in august 2000 . in 2000 , laura bozzo stirred controversy by starting a relationship with christian suarez ; 24 & nbsp ; years her junior and former member of the argentine musical group complot . references .