Moat

historical use . ancient . image : buhen3.jpg thumb 250px north view of the fortress of buhen in ancient egypt . some of the earliest evidence of moats has been uncovered around ancient egyptian castles . one example is at buhen , a castle excavated in nubia . other evidence of ancient moats is found in the ruins of babylon , and in reliefs from ancient egypt , assyria , and other cultures in the region . article on netherlands national museum of antiquities website evidence of early moats around settlements has been discovered in many archaeological sites throughout southeast asia , including noen u-loke , ban non khrua chut , ban makham thae and ban non wat . the use of the moats could have been either for defensive or agriculture purposes . mcgrath , r . , & boyd , w . ( 2001 ) . the chronology of the iron age'moats ' of northeast thailand . antiquity , 75 ( 288 ) . medieval . moats were excavated around castles and other fortifications as part of the defensive system as an obstacle immediately outside the walls . in suitable locations they might be filled with water . a moat made access to the walls difficult for siege weapons , such as siege towers and battering rams , which needed to be brought up against a wall to be effective . a water-filled moat made the practice of mining , digging tunnels under the castles in order to effect a collapse of the defences , very difficult as well . segmented moats have one dry section and one section filled with water . dry moats cut across the narrow part of a spur or peninsula are called neck ditches . moats separating different elements of a castle , such as the inner and outer wards are cross ditches . the word adapted in middle english from the old french motte '' mound , hillock '' and was first applied to the central mound on which a castle was erected ( see motte and bailey ) , and then came to be applied to the excavated ring , a '' dry moat '' . the shared derivation implies that the two features were closely related and possibly constructed at the same time . the term moat is also applied to natural formations reminiscent of the artificial structure , and to similar modern architectural features . later western fortification . image : naarden kl.jpg thumb right 250px the 17th-century fortified town of naarden , netherlands , showing bastions projecting into the wet moat with the introduction of siege artillery , a new style of fortification emerged in the 16th century using low walls and projecting strong points called bastions , which was known as the trace italienne . the walls were further protected from infantry attack by wet or dry moats , sometimes in elaborate systems . jean-denis and g . g . lepage , french fortifications , 1715-1815 : an illustrated history , mcfarland & co 2010 ( pp.46-50 ) when this style of fortification was superseded by lines of polygonal forts in the mid-19th century , moats continued to be used for close protection . fortress study group : simon barrass , an introduction to artillery fortification , 2011 . africa . the walls of benin were a combination of ramparts and moats , called iya , used as a defense of the capital benin city in present-day edo state of nigeria . it was considered the largest man-made structure lengthwise , second only to the great wall of china and the largest earthwork in the world . with more recent work by patrick darling , it has been established as the largest man-made structure in the world , larger than sungbo 's eredo , also in nigeria . it enclosed 6,500 & nbsp ; km 2 of community lands . its length was over 16,000 & nbsp ; km of earth boundaries . it was estimated that earliest construction began in 800 and continued into the mid-15th century . the walls are built of a ditch and dike structure ; the ditch dug to form an inner moat with the excavated earth used to form the exterior rampart . the benin walls were ravaged by the british in 1897 . scattered pieces of the walls remain in edo , with material being used by the locals for building purposes . the walls continue to be torn down for real estate developments . the walls of benin city were the world 's largest man-made structure . fred pearce wrote in new scientist : '' they extend for some 16,000 kilometres in all , in a mosaic of more than 500 interconnected settlement boundaries . they cover 6,500 square kilometres and were all dug by the edo people . in all , they are four times longer than the great wall of china , and consumed a hundred times more material than the great pyramid of cheops . they took an estimated 150 million hours of digging to construct , and are perhaps the largest single archaeological phenomenon on the planet . '' . asia . image : imperial palace tokyo map.png thumb upright map of the tokyo imperial palace and surrounding gardens showing the elaborate moat systemjapanese castles often have very elaborate moats , sometimes with many moats laid out in concentric circles around the castle and a host of different patterns engineered around the landscape . japanese castles will have up to three of these concentric moats . the outer moat of japanese castles typically protects other support buildings in addition to the castle . as many japanese castles have historically been a very central part of their respective city , the moats have provided a vital waterway to the city . even in modern times , the moat system of the kōkyo comprises a very active body of water , hosting everything from rental boats and fishing ponds to restaurants . most modern japanese castles have moats filled with water , but castles in the feudal period more commonly had 'dry moats ' , a trench . a is a dry moat dug into a slope . a is a series of parallel trenches running up the sides of the excavated mountain , and the earthen wall , which was also called , was an outer wall made of earth dug out from a moat . even today , it is common for mountain japanese castles to have dry moats . a is a moat filled with water . moats were also used in the forbidden city and xi'an in china ; in vellore in india ; hsinchu in taiwan ; and in southeast asia , such as at angkor wat in cambodia and chiang mai in thailand . australia . the only moat fort ever built in australia was fort lytton in brisbane . as brisbane was much more vulnerable to attack than either sydney or melbourne , a series of coastal defenses were built throughout moreton bay , with fort lytton the largest of these defenses . built between 1880–81 , in response to fear of a russian invasion . it is a pentagonal fortress concealed behind grassy embankments , and surrounded by a water-filled moat . north america . moats were developed independently by north american indigenous people of the mississippian culture as the outer defence of some fortified villages . the remains of a 16th-century moat are still visible at the parkin archeological state park in eastern arkansas . the maya people also used moats , for example in the city of becan . european colonists in the americas often built dry ditches surrounding forts built protect important landmarks , harbors , or cities ( e.g . fort jay on governors island in new york harbor ) . photo gallery . image : muiderslot september 2007.jpg muiderslot , netherlands image : the moat around fort pulaski , savannah , ga img 4673.jpg moat surrounding fort pulaski national monument near savannah , georgia image : keep of matsumoto castle.jpg matsumoto castle , a japanese castle in nagano prefecture image : bodiam-castle-10my8-1197.jpg bodiam castle , a 14th-century castle near robertsbridge in east sussex , england image : caerlaverock castle from the air.jpg caerlaverock castle , a 13th-century castle in southern scotland image : sunset of the forbidden city 2006.jpg forbidden city , beijing : north-western angle image : angkor-wat-from-the-air.jpg angkor wat , cambodia image : egeskov slot 08.jpg egeskov castle , denmark image : lissingeneugenbracht1880burglissingen.jpg castle of lissingen image : sigiriya moat 2011.jpg sigiriya moat , sri lanka file : qufu city wall - south of the west gate - looking s - p1050985.jpg frozen moat of the walled city of qufu , china image : fortbourtange.jpg fort bourtange , a late 16th-century star fort in groningen , netherlands image : fort brockhurst 4-gosport - geograph.org.uk - 693238.jpg fort brockhurst a mid-19th-century polygonal fort in hampshire , england image : fort-jefferson dry-tortugas.jpg fort jefferson , dry tortugas , florida image : moat castle steinfurt.jpg moat with civic houses bordering on it in steinfurt image : beijing ancient city gate and moat.jpg beijing ancient city gate and moat image : vellorefort.jpg vellore fort moat , in tamil nadu , india file : daalsesingel-utrecht-2020.jpg the daalsesingel , a part of the moat that surrounds the city center of utrecht , netherlands file : hikone-castle-canal-cherry-blossom-2018-luka-peternel.jpg hikone castle moat file : gate-of-divine-might-forbidden-city-2018-luka-peternel.jpg forbidden city moat file : landskrona citadell från luften.jpg landskrona citadel with mid 15th-century dual moat construction . modern usage . architectural usage . thumb dry moats were a key element used in french classicism and beaux-arts architecture dwellings , both as decorative designs and to provide discreet access for service . excellent examples of these can be found in newport , rhode island at miramar ( mansion ) and the elms , as well as at carolands , outside of san francisco , california , and at union station in toronto , ontario , canada . additionally , a dry moat can allow light and fresh air to reach basement workspaces , as for example at the james farley post office in new york city . anti-terrorist moats . while moats are no longer a significant tool of warfare , modern architectural building design continues to use them as a defence against certain modern threats , such as terrorist attacks from car bombs and armoured fighting vehicles . for example , the new location of the embassy of the united states , london , opened in 2018 , included a moat among its security features—the first new moat built in england in over a century . modern moats may also be used for aesthetic or ergonomic purposes . the catawba nuclear station has been constructing a concrete moat around some of the plant ( other sides of the plant are bordering a lake ) . the moat is a part of industry wide added precautions after the september 11 , 2001 attacks . . safety moats . moats , rather than fences , separate animals from spectators in many modern zoo installations . moats were first used in this way by carl hagenbeck at his tierpark in hamburg , germany . the structure , with a vertical outer retaining wall rising directly from the moat , is an extended usage of the ha-ha of english landscape gardening . border defence moats . in 2004 , plans were suggested for a two-mile moat across the southern border of the gaza strip to prevent tunneling from egyptian territory to the border town of rafah . in 2008 , city officials in yuma , arizona planned to dig out a two-mile stretch of a 180-hectare ( 440-acre ) wetland known as hunters hole , to control immigrants coming from mexico . . pest control moats . researchers of jumping spiders , which have excellent vision and adaptable tactics , built water-filled miniature moats , too wide for the spiders to jump across . some specimens were rewarded for jumping then swimming , and others for swimming only . portia fimbriata from queensland generally succeeded , for whichever method they were rewarded . when specimens from two different populations of portia labiata were set the same task , members of one population worked out for whichever method they were rewarded , while members of the other continued to use whichever method they tried first and did not try to adapt . as a basic method of pest control in bonsai , a moat may be used to restrict access of crawling insects to the bonsai . see also . drawbridge gracht ha-ha wall moot hill ( sometimes written as moat hill ) neck ditch