Strategic Petroleum Reserve (United States)

facilities . the spr management office is located in elmwood , louisiana , a suburb of new orleans . the reserve is stored at four sites on the gulf of mexico , each located near a major center of petrochemical refining and processing . each site contains a number of artificial caverns created in salt domes below the surface . individual caverns within a site can be up to below the surface , average dimensions are wide and deep , and capacity ranges from . almost 4 billion was spent on the facilities . the decision to store in caverns was made in order to reduce costs ; the department of energy claims it is roughly 10 times cheaper to store oil below surface with the added advantages of no leaks and a constant natural churn of the oil due to a temperature gradient in the caverns . the caverns were created by drilling down and then dissolving the salt with water . existing . bryan mound : freeport , texas . 20 caverns with a storage capacity of with a drawdown capacity of per day . '' strategic petroleum reserve plan : expansion to one billion barrels '' ( page 5 ) , us department of energy , june 2007 . big hill : winnie , texas . has a capacity of with a drawdown capacity of per day . west hackberry : lake charles , louisiana . has a capacity of with a drawdown capacity of per day . bayou choctaw : baton rouge , louisiana . has a capacity of with a maximum drawdown rate of per day . proposed . richton , mississippi : this facility , if built as planned , would have had a capacity of with a drawdown capacity of per day . former secretary of energy samuel bodman announced the creation of this site in february 2007 . as of 2008 , this site was facing some opposition . '' oil reserve site raises ire , bush policy tested '' , reuters . retrieved june 21 , 2016 . according to the doe : '' activities towards the goal of expansion of the spr to one billion barrels , as directed by congress in the 2005 act , were cancelled in 2011 after congress rescinded all remaining expansion funds . '' . retired . weeks island : iberia parish , louisiana ( decommissioned 1999 ) : capacity of . this facility was a conventional room and pillar near-surface salt mine , formerly owned by morton salt . in 1993 , a sinkhole formed on the site , allowing fresh water to intrude into the mine . because of the mine 's construction in salt deposits , fresh water would erode the ceiling , potentially causing the structure to fail . the mine was backfilled with salt-saturated brine . this process , which allowed for recovery of 98 % of the petroleum stored in the facility , reduced the risk of further fresh water intrusion , and helped prevent the remaining oil from leaking into the aquifer that is located over the salt dome . history . background . access to the reserve is determined by the conditions written into the 1975 energy policy and conservation act ( epca ) , primarily to counter a severe supply interruption . the maximum removal rate , by physical constraints , is . oil could begin entering the marketplace 13 days after a presidential order . the department of energy says it has about 59 days of import protection in the spr . this , combined with private sector inventory protection , is estimated to equal 115 days of imports . the spr was created following the 1973 energy crisis . the epca of december 22 , 1975 , made it policy for the united states to establish a reserve up to 1 billion barrels ( 159 million m³ ) of petroleum . a number of existing storage sites were acquired in 1977 . construction of the first surface facilities began in june 1977 . on july 21 , 1977 , the first oil—approximately of saudi arabian light crude—was delivered to the spr . fill was suspended in fiscal year 1995 to devote budget resources to refurbishing the spr equipment and extending the life of the complex . the current spr sites are expected to be usable until around 2025 . fill was resumed in 1999 . repletion and suspension . on november 13 , 2001 , shortly after the september 11 terrorist attacks , president george w . bush announced that the spr would be filled , saying , '' the strategic petroleum reserve is an important element of our nation 's energy security . to maximize long-term protection against oil supply disruptions , i am directing the secretary of energy to fill the spr up to its capacity . '' the highest prior level was reached in 1994 with . at the time of president bush 's directive , the spr contained about . since the directive in 2001 , the capacity of the spr has increased by due to natural enlargement of the salt caverns in which the reserves are stored . the energy policy act of 2005 has since directed the secretary of energy to fill the spr to the full authorized capacity , a process which will require a physical expansion of the reserve 's facilities . on august 17 , 2005 , the spr reached its goal of , or about 96 % of its now-increased capacity . approximately 60 % of the crude oil in the reserve is the less desirable sour ( high sulfur content ) variety . the oil delivered to the reserve is '' royalty-in-kind '' oil—royalties owed to the u.s . government by operators who acquire leases on the federally owned outer continental shelf in the gulf of mexico . these royalties were previously collected as cash , but in 1998 the government began testing the effectiveness of collecting royalties '' in kind '' —or in other words , acquiring the crude oil itself . this mechanism was adopted when refilling the spr began , and once filling is completed , revenues from the sale of future royalties will be paid into the federal treasury . on april 25 , 2006 , president bush announced a temporary halt to petroleum deposits to the spr as part of a four-point program to alleviate high fuel prices . on january 23 , 2007 , president bush suggested in his state of the union speech that congress should approve expansion of the current reserve capacity to twice its current level . on may 16 , 2008 , the u.s . department of energy ( doe ) said it would halt all deliveries to the strategic petroleum reserve sometime in july . this announcement came days after congress voted to direct the bush administration to do the same . on january 2 , 2009 , after a sharp decline in fuel prices , doe said that it would begin buying approximately of crude oil to fill the strategic petroleum reserve , replenishing supplies that were sold after hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 . the purchase would be funded by the roughly 600 million received from those emergency sales . on september 9 , 2011 , a notice of cancellation was published in the federal register after congress rescinded funding for the expansion of the strategic petroleum reserve , reversing the spr expansion initiative previously directed under the energy policy act of 2005 . on october 20 , 2014 , a report by the u.s . government accountability office ( gao ) recommended reducing the size of the reserve . according to the report , the amount of oil held in reserve exceeds the amount required to be kept on hand given the need for imported crude oil had decreased in recent years . the report said the doe agreed with the gao recommendation . on march 19 , 2020 president trump directed the department of energy to fill the strategic petroleum reserve to maximum capacity . this directive was given to help support domestic oil producers given the impending economic collapse from covid-19 and extreme drops in international oil markets . . emergency sales to israel . according to the 1975 sinai interim agreement signed by the united states and israel , as a precondition for israel 's return of the sinai peninsula and its associated oil reserves to egypt , in an emergency the united states was obligated to make oil available for sale to israel for up to five years . israel has never invoked the agreement , however . the agreement was extended in 1979 , 1994 , 2004 , and , most recently , in 2015 for a ten-year period . . international obligations . as a member of the international energy agency ( iea ) , the united states must stock an amount of petroleum equivalent to at least 90 days of u.s . imports . the spr contained an equivalent to 141 days of imports as of september 2016 . the united states is also obligated to contribute 43.9 % of petroleum in any iea-coordinated release . . limitations . the strategic petroleum reserve is primarily a crude petroleum reserve , not a stockpile of refined petroleum fuels such as gasoline , diesel and kerosene . although the united states maintains some extra supply of refined petroleum fuels , e.g . , the northeast home heating oil reserve and northeast gasoline supply reserve under the aegis of the department of energy ( doe ) , the government does not maintain gasoline reserves on anything like the scale of the spr . the spr is intended to give the united states protection from disruptions in oil supplies . in the event of a major disruption to refinery operations , the united states would have to call on members of the international energy agency that stockpile refined products , and use refining capacities outside of the continental united states for relief . there have been suggestions that the doe should increase its supplies and stockpile both gasoline and jet fuel . some countries and zones have a strategic reserve of both petroleum and petroleum products . in some cases , this includes a strategic reserve of jet fuel . former secretary of energy samuel bodman said that the department would consider new facilities for refined products as part of an expansion of . drawdowns . petroleum sales . 1985 : test sale— 1990–1991 : desert storm sale— in august 1990 test sale in january 1991 presidentially ordered drawdown 1996–1997 : non-emergency sales for deficit reduction july–august 2000 : to supply the northeast home heating oil reserve . september–october 2000 : in response to a concern over low distillate levels in the northeastern u.s . 2005 hurricane katrina sale : —katrina shut down 95 % of crude production and 88 % of natural gas output in the gulf of mexico . this amounted to a quarter of total u.s . output . about 735 oil and natural gas rigs and platforms had been evacuated due to the hurricane . 2011 arab spring sale : —non-emergency sale to offset disruptions caused by political upheaval in libya and elsewhere in the middle east . the amount was matched by iea countries , for a total of released from stockpiles around the world . in december 2016 , the doe announced it would begin the sale of in january 2017 . . petroleum exchanges and loans . note : loans are made on a case-by-case basis to alleviate supply disruptions . once conditions return to normal , the loan is returned to the spr with additional oil as interest . april–may 1996 : lent to arco to alleviate pipeline blockage . august 1998 : lent to pemex in return for of higher-quality crude . june 2000 : lent to citgo and conoco in response to shipping channel blockage . october 2002 : lent to shell pipeline company in advance of hurricane lili . september–october 2004 : lent to astra oil , conocophillips , placid refining , shell oil company , and premcor after hurricane ivan . september–october 2005 : lent to exxonmobil , placid refining , valero , bp , marathon oil , and total s.a . after hurricane katrina . purchases of crude oil would then resume in january 2009 using revenues available from the 2005 hurricane katrina emergency sale . the doe purchased at a cost of 553 million . strategic petroleum reserve – profile , february 27 , 2013 . archived april 8 , 2013 . january–february 2006 : lent to total petrochemicals usa due to closure of the sabine–neches waterway to deep-draft vessels after a barge accident in the channel . june 2006 : of sour crude lent to conocophillips and citgo due to the closure for several days of the calcasieu ship channel caused by the release of a mixture of storm water and oil . repaid in early october 2006 . september 2008 : lent to citgo , placid refining , and marathon oil due to disruptions from hurricane gustav . '' oil ends up after dip below 100 '' . cnn . 12 september 2008 . august 2017 : 200,000 barrels of sweet crude and 300,000 barrels of sour crude were lent to phillips 66 due to disruptions from hurricane harvey .