Tights

terminology and related clothing . when made of fine silk , this hosiery was considered to be a stocking . when nylon fibers were developed and introduced in the 1940s , these stockings were referred to as nylons . when the separate legs were woven together with a panty that covered the lower torso up to the waist in a single , integrated format , the term pantyhose was coined , since it was a one piece construction of a panty with a pair of separate hose , one for each leg . this joining together eliminated any need for garters for holding up each separate leg covering . in american english , the difference between pantyhose and tights is determined in the weight of the yarn used and the density or tightness of weaving to which the garment is knitted . generally , anything up to forty denier in the leg or overall is known as pantyhose and anything over that can be classified as tights , as for example 'running tights ' and 'cycling tights ' . in the united kingdom , the word '' tights '' is used in all cases when referring to both pantyhose and '' leggings '' , for footed or footless tights of heavier , normally opaque material . tights can be sheer yet solid in colour , whereas leggings are practically or absolutely opaque , not sheer . thus , the almost-opaque tights are sometimes labelled as semi-opaque and are not considered suitable as pants due to being too revealing or immodest . there are many sub-classifications of tights or pantyhose that describe the precise construction ( such as control top , seamless , support and sheer ) . although most tights are mainly nylon or cotton , lycra is normally included in modern blends to improve fit . athletic tights are absolute opaque and often footless , although they may have a '' stirrup '' that goes under the foot to hold the cuff down near the ankle . historical background . originally , leggings covered only the legs ( not the lower torso ) ; were two separate pieces ; and did not contain elastic fibres , so were cut close fitting ( to use less fabric ) and were loose , not tight . originally derived from the hose worn by european men several centuries ago , tights were made as close fitting as possible for practical reasons when riding horseback . for men of nobility , the material would be made of silk or fine wool rather than the coarser fabrics used by the lower classes . at the time of king henry viii of england , such was the male fashion for displaying a well turned leg that even the king padded the calf area under his hose . portrait paintings of him and other nobility often portray the wearing of a cod piece covering the groin . in both historic and modern times , the wearing of tight hosiery by males has been associated with an accompanying garment fitted at the groin over the male genitalia . in the 15th century , some men wore an elaborate and decorative cod piece to accentuate their genital endowment , and as a symbol of their virility . in modern times , male ballet dancers generally wear a dance belt beneath their tights both to provide support to the genitalia and to promote a smooth , regular appearance since tights are so thin and skin tight as to be revealing of the detailed contours of the male genitalia . wearing of tights has a history going back several centuries , when they were worn by both men and women . today , they are worn primarily by women and girls . in recent years , they have been sometimes offered as men 's fashion . current use . tights are most commonly worn with a skirt or dress by women . they are also worn under trousers by men . in the world of theater tights are also common , especially in renaissance-era costumes , and dance , particularly in ballet . the term '' tights '' has been used to try to ridicule certain traditional british uniform . most famously the serjeant-at-arms at the palace of westminster , after a protester got past the security , were described in the media as '' middle aged men in tights . '' . athletic use . for horseback riding , '' tights '' in some equestrian circles can refer to tightly fitting riding pants of light material that extend all the way down to the rider 's ankle and worn with a 'paddock ' style ( ankle height ) boot . such pants are worn in summer or as an undergarment in winter . in warm climates they can be worn all year round . these '' riding tights '' are cheaper to buy than jodhpurs or breeches which are a type of riding pant made of heavier material and which extends only to mid calf length and are intended to be worn with tall riding boots . tights can also describe the leg coverings worn in bicycling in cold weather and in other athletic activities , especially by runners . these tights are usually a thicker spandex-blend , and are usually footless . it has also been advocated by some sport scientists that the wearing of tights can reduce muscle tissue vibration . tights are popular use of dancers , especially in ballet . modern dancers also may wear tights . athletic tights received some publicity during the 2005–2006 basketball season , when players started wearing the ankle-length tights under their uniform shorts . a prominent nba player , kobe bryant , was one of the first to wear tights , and the style was subsequently adopted by several other nba players , as well as some college and high school players . the style sparked controversy , leading to proposals to prohibit wearing tights with basketball uniforms . in colder temperatures outdoors , american football players sometimes wear spandex tights next to their skin beneath their normal padded stretchy , tightly fitted pants . athletic tights are considered unisex . health and beauty use . because the fabric used in tights is made of interwoven fabric such as nylon or cotton , there are pores in the fabric where modern manufacturers have been able to place other items which benefit the skin . they can use microencapsulation techniques to place substances such as moisturizers and other skin creams in the tights . design features . tights are manufactured in many different varieties for stylistic and comfort reasons . certain leg wear designs include a darker brief or no visible brief at all , the former being used to create extra support or a shaping effect . one area where design is vastly different from model to model is in the toe area . there are several varieties of toe type , such as sandal toes , open toes and reinforced , all offering different effects . whilst some descriptions of the difference between open toe and sandal toe can cause confusion , the industry standard is that a sandal toe covers the whole foot and open toe tights use either a silicone band or toe loops to anchor the garment whilst leaving the toes exposed . . gallery . file:2016 dm formationen latein - tsg backnang 1846 tanzsport - by 2eight - 5sc0535.jpg fishnet tights worn by professional dancers file : taller coreográfico de la unam 2008.jpg tights as outerwear by males and partly as underwear by females on stage file : dallas-001216-n-1110a-513.jpg a cheerleader in sheer nylon tights file : jogger in pink and black.jpg running tights as outerwear file : supporting breast cancer research ( 2907275545 ) . jpg opaque footless tights under a skirt file : wolford cosmopolitan bodysuit and tights - without blouse insert - version 1 - modelled by anastasia voloshina.jpg woman wearing red tights that were produced on the same type of machinery as the bodysuit file : austrian crew - 8961565272.jpg tights as part of a uniform for female employees . see also . compression garment leggings stocking pantyhose underwear fetishism . references . external links .