Karl Mannheim

biography . childhood and education . karl mannheim was born 27 march 1893 in budapest , to a hungarian father , a textile merchant , and german mother , both of jewish descent . david kettler and volker meja , '' karl mannheim 's jewish question '' in religions 2012 , 3 , p . 231 his early education was in that city , he studied philosophy and literature at the university of budapest , though he also went to berlin ( where he studied with georg simmel ) and paris to further his education , returning to hungary around the start of the first world war . he obtained a phd from the university of budapest , and further qualifications from the university of heidelberg . academic career . during the war he was involved in a number of influential intellectual circles : the galileo circle founded by karl polanyi in which michael polanyi also participated , the social science association organised by oscar jászi , and the sonntagskreis or 'sunday circle ' led by györgy lukács . kettler , d . ( 1971 ) ‘ culture and revolution ’ , telos , 10 , pp35-92 . in the brief period of the hungarian soviet republic , in 1919 , mannheim taught in the pedagogical institute of the university of budapest thanks to the patronage of his friend and mentor lukács , karácsony , a . ( 2008 ) . '' soul–life–knowledge : the young mannheim 's way to sociology '' , studies in east european thought . 60 ( 1/2 ) , pp . 97-115 . whose political conversion to communism he did not share . longhurst , brian ( 1989 ) . karl mannheim and the contemporary sociology of knowledge , new york : st martins press , pp . 1-197 . both mannheim and lukács were forced into exile after the rise of horthy as regent of hungary . mannheim chose exile in germany and was there from 1920-1933 . kettler , d . , meja , v . , and stehr , n . ( 1984 ) karl mannheim , london , tavistock . in 1921 , he married psychologist juliska károlyné lang , better known as julia lang . though she is often unacknowledged , lang collaborated with mannheim on many of his works , and along with a number of mannheim 's students , put together many of his works to be published posthumously . after an unsuccessful attempt to gain a sponsor to teach philosophy in heidelberg , mannheim began work in 1924 under the german sociologist alfred weber , the brother of well-known sociologist max weber , and emil lederer . werner , s . ( 1967 ) . '' karl mannheim '' , encyclopedia of philosophy , pp . 1 . in 1926 , mannheim had his habilitation accepted by the faculty of social sciences , thus satisfying the requirements to teach classes in sociology at heidelberg . mannheim was chosen over other competitors for the post , one of whom was walter benjamin . from 1929-1933 , he served as a professor of sociology and political economy at the johann wolfgang goethe university frankfurt am main . norbert elias and hans gerth worked as his assistants from spring 1930 until spring 1933 , with elias as the senior partner . greta kuckhoff , who later became a prominent figure in the ddr , was his administrative assistant in frankfurt , leaving early in 1933 to study at the london school of economics ( lse ) and prepare for mannheim 's emigration there . bernd-rainer barth , helmut müller-enbergs : biographische datenbanken : kuckhoff , greta bundesunmittelbare stiftung des öffentlichen rechts . wer war wer in der ddr ? , 5th edition , volume 1 ch . links verlag , berlin ( 2010 ) . in 1933 , mannheim was ousted from his professorship under the terms of the anti-semitic law to purge the civil service and was forced into exile . after fleeing the nazi regime and settling in britain , mannheim became a lecturer in sociology at the london school of economics , under a program to assist academic exiles , until his death . in 1941 , sir fred clarke , director of the institute of education at the university of london , invited him to teach sociology on a part-time basis in conjunction with his declining role at lse under wartime conditions . in january 1946 he was appointed as the first sociology professor at the institute of education , a position he held until his death in london a year later . during his time in england , mannheim played a prominent role in 'the moot ' , a christian discussion group of which t.s . eliot was also a member , concerned with the role of religion and culture in society , which was convened by j . h . oldham . he gained a position of influence through his editorship of the extensive routledge series on social sciences . death . mannheim died in london on january 9 , 1947 at the age of 53 due to a congenitally weak heart . shortly before his death , he was invited to be the head of the european unesco , an offer he was unfortunately not able to accept . he was cremated at golder 's green crematorium and his ashes were placed in the columbarium there in an urn , which were later mixed with those of his wife . he was originally placed opposite sigmund freud as a planned pairing , but freud was later relocated . sociological work . the hungarian phase ( 1919 ) . mannheim was a precocious scholar and an accepted member of two influential intellectual circles in budapest . in the autumn of 1915 , he was the youngest founding member lemert , charles . '' social theory : the multicultural and classic readings . '' weslyan university . of the sonntagskreis ( sunday circle ) alongside béla balázs , lajos fülep , and györgy lukács , where a wide range of literary and philosophical topics where discussed . mary gluck ( 1985 ) georg lukács and his generation , 1900-1918 . cambridge , mass . : harvard university press . pp . 14–16 some discussion focused on the enthusiasms of german diagnosticians of cultural crisis , but also the novels of fyodor dostoyevsky and the writings søren kierkegaard and of the german mystics . the social science association , on the other hand , was founded by oszkár jászi in 1919 and was interested above all in french and english sociological writings . mannheim 's hungarian writings , notably his doctoral dissertation '' structural analysis of epistemology , '' anticipate his lifelong search for '' synthesis '' between these currents . according to the sociologist longhurst , the sonntagskreis '' rejected any 'positivist ' or 'mechanist ' understanding of society and was dissatisfied with the existing political arrangements in hungary . the way forward was seen to be through the spiritual renewal entailed in a revolution in culture '' . the group members were discontent with the political and intellectual composition of hungary , however , '' they rejected a materialism marxist critique of this society . hungary was to be changed by a spiritual renewal led by those who had reached a significant level of cultural awareness '' . yet they did not exclude marxist themes and mannheim 's work was influenced by lukács ' marxist interests , as he credits marx as the forerunner to the sociology of knowledge . ryan , michael . '' karl mannheim '' , encyclopedia of social theory , pp . 469 . . the german phase ( 1919–1933 ) . this was mannheim 's most productive period , as this is when he turned from philosophy to sociology to inquire into the roots of culture . in the early part of his stay in germany , mannheim published his doctoral dissertation '' structural epistemology of knowledge '' , which discusses his theory of the structure of epistemology , the '' relations between the knower , the known and the to be known…for mannheim based on psychology , logic and ontology '' . sociologist brian longhurst explains , his work on epistemology represents the height of his early '' idealist '' phase , and transition to hermeneutic '' issues of interpretation within culture '' . in this essay , mannheim introduces '' the hermeneutic problem of the relationship between the whole and the parts '' . he argues the differences between art , the natural sciences , and philosophy '' with respect to truth claims '' , stating science always tries to disprove one theory , where art never does this and can coexist in more than one worldview ; philosophy falls in between the two extremes . mannheim posits the '' danger of relativism '' , in which historical process yields cultural product ; '' if thought to be relative to a historical period , it may be unavailable to a historical period '' mannheim 's ambitious attempt to promote a comprehensive sociological analysis of the structures of knowledge was treated with suspicion by marxists and neo-marxists of the grouping that was later recognized as an antecedent of the frankfurt school . they saw the rising popularity of the sociology of knowledge as neutralization and a betrayal of marxist inspiration . arguments between mannheim and horkheimer played out in faculty forums , like the kant gesellschaft and paul tillich 's christian socialist discussion group . horkheimer 's institute at the time was best known for the empirical work it encouraged , and several of mannheim 's doctoral students used its resources . while mannheim and horkheimer 's contest looms large in retrospect , mannheim 's most active contemporary competitors were in fact other academic sociologists , notably the proto-fascist leipzig professor , hans freyer , and the proponent of formal sociology and leading figure in the profession , leopold von wiese . theory of the sociology of knowledge and sociology of culture mannheim 's theory on the sociology of knowledge is based on some of the epistemological discoveries of immanuel kant . sociology of knowledge is known as a section of the greater field known as the sociology of culture . the idea of sociology of culture is defined as the relationship between culture and society . remmling , gunter w . '' karl mannheim : revision of an intellectual portrait . '' social forces , vol . 40 , no . 1 ( oct . , 1961 ) , pp . 23-30 . there are two main branches of sociology of culture : a moderate branch and a radical branch . the moderate branch is represented by max scheler , who believed that social conditions do not affect the content of knowledge . the radical branch , on the contrary , highlighted that society is determined by all aspects of culture . when it came to the sociology of knowledge , mannheim believed that it established a dependence of knowledge on social reality . though mannheim was far from being a marxist , sociology of knowledge was largely based on marx 's theories regarding classes . mannheim 's central question of the sociology of knowledge , which tried to understand the relationship between society and knowledge , demonstrated his endeavors to solve the issue of '' historical nature and unity of mind and life . '' mannheim affirmed the sociology of knowledge as an '' extrinsic interpretation and sets apart from the immanent interpretation of thought products . '' the immanent interpretation is based on one 's understanding of intellectual content , which is limited to theoretical content of knowledge and the extrinsic interpretation is based on the capability to understand manifestations . knowing the difference between these two types of interpretations helped mannheim create a place for the sociology of knowledge in the scientific system , thus leaving the sociology of knowledge to stand opposite of the traditional human sciences and to interpret knowledge through an exploration of social reality . mannheim claimed that the sociology of knowledge has to be understood as the visionary expression of '' historical experience which has social reality at its vital center . '' in 1920 , a series of his essays were published in germany under the name essays in sociology of knowledge . these essays focused on the search for the meaning behind social reality , the notion of '' truth '' and the role of the empirical intellectual in search for these truths . later in his life , after publishing ideology and utopia , mannheim published essays in sociology of culture in 1956 that basically served to merge his concern with social reality and democracy . according to mannheim ideology was linked to a notion of reality , meanwhile culture focuses more so on the mind of the individual and how it perceives that reality , both , however , '' still concerned with the role of the intelligentsia . '' ideology and utopia ( 1929 ) mannheim is most well known for his study and analysis of ideologies and utopias . one of his main ideas regarding utopias is what he considers the '' utopian mentality '' , which mannheim describes in four ideals types : orgiastic chiliasm liberal humanist utopias the conservative idea which modern communism in ideology and utopia , he argued that the application of the term ideology ought to be broadened . he traced the history of the term from what he called a '' particular '' view . this view saw ideology as the perhaps deliberate obscuring of facts . this view gave way to a '' total '' conception ( most notably in marx ) , which argued that a whole social group 's thought was formed by its social position ( e.g . the proletariat 's beliefs were conditioned by their relationship to the means of production ) . however , he called for a further step , which he called a general total conception of ideology , in which it was recognized that everyone 's beliefs—including the social scientist's—were a product of the context they were created in . thus , to mannheim , '' ideas were products of their times and of the social statuses of their proponents . '' mannheim points out social class , location and generation as the greatest determinants of knowledge . he feared this could lead to relativism but proposed the idea of relationism as an antidote . to uphold the distinction , he maintained that the recognition of different perspectives according to differences in time and social location appears arbitrary only to an abstract and disembodied theory of knowledge . the list of reviewers of the german ideology and utopia includes a remarkable roll call of individuals who became famous in exile , after the rise of hitler : hannah arendt , max horkheimer , herbert marcuse , paul tillich , hans speier , günther stern ( aka günther anders ) , waldemar gurian , siegfried kracauer , otto neurath , karl august wittfogel , béla fogarasi , and leo strauss . in the early 1970s , erich fromm and michael maccoby would later illustrate scientifically the effects of social class and economic structure on personality in their landmark study social character in a mexican village . out of all of his works , mannheim 's book ideologie und utopie was the most widely debated book by a living sociologist in germany during the weimar republic . it was first published in german in 1929 , with the english publication , ideology and utopia , following in 1936 . this work has been a standard in american-style international academic sociology , carried by the interest it aroused in the united states . mannheim and macrosociology mannheim 's work was written mostly through a macrosociological lens . while writing ideology and utopia mannheim 's fundamental questions was '' why does man behave different in the framework of different social group and class structure . '' in answering this question , his intellectual contribution to sociology was focused more on social problems than sociological problems . the consolidation of his work focused on topics such as '' social stability , social groups and the psychic differentials corresponding to social status or class cleavages . '' to mannheim the public was essential and fundamental to a democratic society . therefore , assuring that not one ideology dictate all of the public is vital for the preservation of democracy . the british phase ( 1933–1947 ) . in his british phase mannheim attempted a comprehensive analysis of the structure of modern society by way of democratic social planning and education . mannheim 's first major work published during this period was man and society in an age of reconstruction 1935 , in which he argues for a shift from the liberal order of laissez-faire capitalism , '' founded on the unregulated trade cycle , unextended democracy , free competition and ideas of competitive individualism '' to planned democracy . in diagnosis of our time , mannheim expands on this argument and expresses concern for the transition from liberal order to planned democracy , according to longhurst , arguing '' . the embryonic planned democratic society can develop along democratic or dictatorial routes.as expressed in the totalitarian societies of nazi germany and the soviet union '' . his work was admired more by educators , social workers , and religious thinkers than it was by the small community of british sociologists . his books on planning nevertheless played an important part in the political debates of the immediate post-war years , both in the united states and in several european countries . legacy . mannheim 's sociological theorizing has been the subject of numerous book-length studies , evidence of an international interest in his principal themes . mannheim was not the author of any work he himself considered a finished book , but rather of some fifty major essays and treatises , most later published in book form . selected works . mannheim , k . ( 1922-24 1980 ) structures of thinking . london : routledge & kegan paul . mannheim , k . ( 1925 1986 ) conservatism . a contribution to the sociology of knowledge . london : routledge & kegan paul . mannheim , k . ( 1929 ) , ideologie und utopie mannheim , k . ( 1930 2001 ) sociology as political education . new brunswick , nj . transaction . mannheim , k . ( 1935 ( english 1940 ) ) man and society in an age of reconstruction . london : routledge . mannheim , k . ( 1936 ) ideology and utopia . london : routledge . mannheim , k . ( 1950 ) '' freedom , power , and democratic planning . '' oxford university press mannheim , k . ( 1971 . 1993 ) from karl mannheim . new brunswick , nj . transaction . see also . ; books history and class consciousness ; topics theory of generations . references . further reading . richard aldrich , ( 2002 ) the institute of education 1902-2002 : a centenary history , london : institute of education . david frisby , ( 1983 ) the alienated mind , london : heineman . david kettler , volker meja , and nico stehr ( 1984 ) , karl mannheim , london : tavistock . david kettler and volker meja , ( 1995 ) karl mannheim and the crisis of liberalism , new brunswick and london : transaction . colin loader , ( 1985 ) the intellectual development of karl mannheim , cambridge : cambridge university press . colin loader and david kettler ( 2001 ) karl mannheim 's sociology as political education new brunswick and london : transaction . volker meja and nico stehr ( eds ) , ( 19821990 ) knowledge and politics . the sociology of knowledge dispute , london : routledge & kegan paul . eva karadi and erzsebet vezer , ( 1985 ) georg lukacs , karl mannheim und der sonntagskreis , frankfurt/m : sendler . reinhard laube ( 2004 ) karl mannheim und die krise des historismus , goettingen : vandenhoeck & ruprecht . guglielmo rinzivillo , scienza e valori in karl mannheim , roma , armando armando , 2016 . external links . karl-mannheim chair for cultural studies , zeppelin university , friedrichshafen , germany studies of karl mannheim . likenesses of mannheim in the national portrait gallery .