Foucault's Pendulum

plot summary . a man named casaubon casaubon 's name refers to classical scholar isaac casaubon and also evokes a scholar character in george eliot 's middlemarch . is hiding in the musée des arts et métiers after closing . he believes that a secret society has kidnapped his friend jacopo belbo and are now after him , and will meet in the museum . as he waits casubon reflects on his life that led him here , but it is implied he is an unreliable narrator whose mind has been warped by conspiracy theories . in 1970s milan , casaubon is studying the knights templar when he meets belbo and his colleague diotallevi . belbo works as an editor in a publishing house and invites casaubon to review a manuscript about the templars . the manuscript , by a colonel ardenti , claims he discovered a secret plan of the templars to take over the world . ardenti mysteriously vanishes after meeting with belbo and casaubon . casaubon moves to brazil to pursue a relationship with a woman named amparo and meets agliè , an elderly man who implies that he is the mystical count of st . germain . casaubon 's relationship with amparo falls apart after attending an umbanda rite and he returns to milan , where he is hired by belbo 's employer , mr . garamond , a reference to french publisher claude garamond as a researcher . casaubon learns that in addition to a respected publishing house , garamond also owns manuzio , a vanity press that charges incompetent authors large sums to print their work . rendered '' manutius '' in the english translation , a reference to the 15th century printer aldus manutius garamond has the idea to begin two lines of occult books , one for serious publishing and the other to be published by manutius to attract more vanity authors . belbo , diotallevi and casaubon become submerged in occult manuscripts that draw flimsy connections between historical events , and have the idea to develop their own as a game . using belbo 's personal computer , with abulafia and ardenti 's manuscript as a foundation , the three create what they call '' the plan '' using a program that rearranges text at random . the plan becomes an intricate web of conspiracy theories about the templars and their goal to reshape the world using '' telluric currents '' , which are focused at the foucault pendulum . in addition to numerous other historical organizations apparently involved in the plan , the three invent a fictional secret society , the tres ( templi resurgentes equites synarchici , latin for '' the risen again synarchic knights of the temple '' ) . the three increasingly become obsessed with the plan and wonder if it could be true . diotallevi is diagnosed with cancer and attributes it to divine retribution for his role in the plan . belbo discusses the plan with agliè and claims to be in possession of a templar map of the telluric currents ; agliè demands to see it and is refused . agliè convinces himself he is the head of the tres , as are garamond , ardenti , and many of the diabolical authors , and forces belbo to come to paris with him . casaubon goes to belbo 's apartment and reads his personal files , and goes to paris and foucault 's pendulum to see agliè and his associates . in the present , a group led by agliè gathers around the pendulum for an arcane ritual . casaubon sees several ectoplasmic forms appear , one of which claims to be the real comte de saint-germain and denounces agliè in front of his followers . belbo is questioned but he refuses to reveal what he knows , inciting a riot during which belbo is hanged from foucault 's pendulum . casaubon escapes the museum and flees to the countryside villa where belbo grew up . casaubon soon learns that diotallevi succumbed to his cancer at midnight on st . john 's eve , coincidentally the same time belbo died . casaubon meditates on events and is resigned to capture by the tres , and he will follow belbo 's lead and tell them nothing . while waiting in the villa , casaubon finds an old manuscript by belbo that relates a mystical experience he had when he was twelve , in which he perceived ultimate meaning beyond signs and semiotics . he realizes that much of belbo 's behavior and possibly his creation of the plan and even his death was inspired by belbo 's desire to recapture that lost meaning . bondanella , umberto eco and the open text , page 150 . the mystical experience involved playing the trumpet and , in 2008 , eco told an interviewer that he plays the trumpet every day to recapture the feelings of his lost childhood . see also richard rorty , the pragmatist 's progress , page 90 . . major themes . most books written in this fiction genre seem to focus on the mysterious , and aim to provide their own version of the conspiracy theory . eco avoids this pitfall without holding back on the historical mystery surrounding the knights templar . in fact , the novel may be viewed as a critique , spoof , or deconstruction of the grand overarching conspiracies often found in postmodern literature . although the main plot does detail a conspiratorial '' plan '' , the book focuses on the development of the characters , and their slow transition from skeptical editors , mocking the manutius manuscripts to credulous diabolicals themselves . in this way the conspiracy theory provided is a plot device , rather than an earnest proposition . belbo 's writings are a recurrent theme throughout the book . the entire book is narrated in first person by casaubon , with brief interludes from the files on abulafia . these passages are often eccentrically written , and deal in most part with belbo 's childhood , his constant sense of failure , and his obsession with lorenza . the interludes from his childhood serve as stark contrast to the mythical world of cults and conspiracies . belbo is extremely careful to not try to create ( literature ) , because he deems himself unworthy , although it becomes somewhat obvious that writing is his passion . this attitude of constant subconscious self-abasement fits in with the overall irony focused on in the book , considering that belbo is eventually consumed by ( re ) creation of the plan ; one excerpt meant for the unattainable lorenza reads , '' i could not possess you , but i can blow up history . '' casaubon is a scholar . while belbo seeks inner peace , casaubon 's quest is of knowledge . the uncertainty of scientific knowledge and human experience is explored in his character , as he participates in various extra-natural events . his narratives abandon his strict realism and become increasingly inclined towards the supernatural as the novel progresses . mr . garamond , whose primary business is selling dreams ( through his vanity press outlet ) , comes to believe the fantasy world his authors weave . it is possible though , that he had always been a '' diabolical '' , and founded his publishing business to fish for information . societies in the novel . the following list among the groups that appear in foucault 's pendulum . they include , in alphabetical order , order of assassins , bavarian illuminati , bogomils , cabalists , candomblé , cathars , church of jesus christ of latter-day saints , elders of zion , freemasons , gnostics , jesuits , knights templar , opus dei , ordo templi orientis , panta rei and the rosicrucians . an obscure one-time reference to the fictional cthulhu cult through a quote from the satanic rituals – '' i ' a cthulhu ! i ' a s'ha-t ' n ! '' . the words closed a ritual composed by michael aquino . originally just '' i ' a cthulhu ! '' , anton lavey added '' i ' a s'ha-t ' n ! '' to give it a '' satanic touch '' . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) – mr . garamond included them in his list of '' occult '' organizations to contact about book ideas , explaining '' i read about them in a detective story , too , but they may not exist anymore . '' . comparison with other writings . foucault 's pendulum ( 1988 ) has been called '' the thinking man 's da vinci code '' . the parchment that sparks the plan plays a role which is similar to the parchments in the rennes-le-château story in brown 's novel and in the holy blood and the holy grail ( 1982 ) , from which brown drew inspiration . eco 's novel predated the da vinci phenomenon by more than a decade , but both novels are concerned with the knights templar , complex conspiracies , secret codes , and even a chase around the monuments of paris . eco does so , however , from a much more critical perspective ; foucault is more a satire on the futility of conspiracy theories and those who believe them , rather than an attempt to proliferate such beliefs . eco was asked whether he had read the brown novel ; he replied : i was obliged to read it because everybody was asking me about it . my answer is that dan brown is one of the characters in my novel foucault 's pendulum , which is about people who start believing in occult stuff . – but you yourself seem interested in the kabbalah , alchemy and other occult practices explored in the novel . no . in foucault 's pendulum i wrote the grotesque representation of these kind of people . so dan brown is one of my creatures . eco was indebted to danilo kiš 's story '' the book of kings and fools '' in the encyclopedia of the dead ( 1983 ) for the portrayal of sergei nilus . the boston globe claimed that '' one can trace a lineage from robert anton wilson 's the illuminatus ! trilogy to umberto eco 's foucault 's pendulum '' . the illuminatus ! trilogy was written 13 years before foucault 's pendulum . george johnson wrote on the similarity of the two books that '' both works were written tongue in cheek , with a high sense of irony . '' both books are divided into ten segments represented by the ten sefiroth . foucault 's pendulum also bears a number of similarities to eco 's own experiences and writing . the character of belbo was brought up in the region of piedmont in northern italy . eco refers to his own visit to a candomblé ceremony in brazil in an article compiled in faith in fakes , reminiscent of the episode in the novel . he also describes french ethnologist roger bastide who bears a resemblance to the character of agliè . eco , u . , faith in fakes : travels in hyperreality , picador , 1987 , eco 's novel was also a direct inspiration on charles cecil during the development of revolution software 's highly successful point and click adventure game broken sword : the shadow of the templars , in which an american tourist and a french journalist must thwart a conspiracy by a shadowy cabal who model themselves on the knights templar . broken sword and 25 years of revolution by simon parkin , eurogamer , 09/08/2015 . revolution software 's kickstarter page for broken sword 5 : the serpent 's curse