Eastlake Movement

history . eastlake movement was named after the english architect charles locke eastlake ( nephew of charles lock eastlake ) following the release of his influential book ‘ hints on household taste in furniture , upholstery and other details ’ . eastlake was originally a painter who trained in rome and was considered to have great knowledge in art however he had a specific preference . in the ‘ hints on household taste in furniture , upholstery and other details ’ book , eastlake promoted victorian style furniture which had opposed the curved features of the french baroque revival styles . instead , eastlake style had “ angular , notched and carved ” features and although he did not produce any furniture himself , cabinet makers produced them . his book influenced custom designers as well as machine made manufacturers who eastlake abhorred . his quote “ i find american tradesmen continually advertising what they are pleased to call eastlake furniture , the production of which i have had nothing whatever to do , and for the taste of which i should be very sorry to be considered responsible ” shows his stance on this . this influence later led to the eastlake movement in the united states where eastlake style furniture were being produced for the middle-class . it was known to be affordable while also being handcrafted and easy to clean which shows the transformative nature of eastlake 's ideas to furniture . . characteristics . eastlake style applied to houses as well as furniture . characteristics of these houses include the lathe-shaped wooden forms and mechanical jigsaw wooden forms . porch posts and railings had intricate wooden designs and curved brackets and scrolls were placed at corners . the façade also included “ perforated gables and pediments , carved panels and a profusion of beaded spindles , and lattice work found along porch eaves . ” mansardic porches were another characteristic and had wrought iron crestings . the color combination of the houses also emphasized the contrast between the lighter colors of the details and the darker colors of the house body . in furniture , eastlake was particularly fond of oak and cherry wood grains ; however , american manufacturers still used ebonized wood despite eastlake 's suggestions . the forms of the furniture were often rectilinear and had “ geometric ornament , turnings , brackets , trestles , and incised linear decoration . ” additionally , the designs were easily made by machines . eastlake also believed that the prices of his furniture should be “ as cheap as that which is ugly ” as he could not understand why anyone would buy a more expensive piece of furniture for a more intricate design . eastlake 's furniture was for the middle-class home , and being easy to clean was another one of the characteristics . gallery . william s . clark house . one example of an eastlake movement building is william s . clark house in eureka , california . the house was built in 1888 and contains “ an elaborately-decorated entrance porch , flanking square bays , side slant bays , and roof gables . ” eastlake ornamentation can be seen in the bays , gables , windows , frieze , and porch . the entrance is decorated with spools , sunbursts , holes , buttons , brackets , scallops , and pierced cylinders , and is supported by large chamfered columns . the glass planes of the recessed double doors are decorated with panels above and below . the square and slant bays contain brackets , panels , moldings , and buttons . the gables contain a grillwork of stickwork , knobs , bevelled sticks , and pierced scallops that hang from the edge of the roof . the gable bracing of william s . clark house is untraditional as most gable bracings of eastlake style would connect to the edge of the roof . the gable bracing instead hangs from the edge which provides shadows on the house wall . the frieze contains vertical and zigzag bevelled sticks , and pierced and chamfered brackets that surround the cornice . below the bays , the corners of the stringcourse are filled by bevelled sunbursts . the slant bays have side porches that extend to the back of the house and there is a rear hall that connects the house with a storage/laundry annex at the back of the property . on the north side of the house , there are small , squared windows on either side of the round headed window , which create a palladian effect . susie van kirk ( december 9 , 1986 ) . '' national register of historic places inventory/nomination : william s . clark house '' . national park service . the entrance hall , double parlors , and dining rooms are significant in that the décor and character is preserved . the unpainted windows and stairway banister have natural wood finishes that have darkened over time . the doors , stairway panels below the railing , and dining room wainscoting have the same 19th century oak graining . the wallpapers , picture railings , period furnishings , and potted ferns are in the same style as the victorian features of the interior . in the fireplaces in the rear parlor , family room , and dining room , there are highly polished , hardwood mantels above small fireplaces . mirrors , polished tiles , and intricate shelves extend close to the picture railing . the entrance hall stairway has a banister and a light-topped newel post leading to the second-floor hallway which is surrounded by another open-work banister . there is a contrast between the white-painted woodwork and light embossed wallpaper with the darker woodwork and paper of the parlors and dining room . the doors upstairs are painted and panelled and each has a glass of transom above . the bathroom still has an old pull-chain tank toilet and the bath has an old clawfoot tub . . winters house . winters house is an eastlake movement building in sacramento , california and was built in 1890 . it has 3 stories and is approximately 4500 square feet . some exterior features of the house include ornamental details , such as “ sunburst pediments , a frieze of scrollwork sunbursts , dentil work in the gables , a mansard porch canopy , and a decorative balustrade with spindles and stick work . “ the house has not had any significant deviations from the original design , materials and workmanship . vickie m . cosentino ( september 30 , 1998 ) . '' national register of historic places registration : winters house / 2324-2326 h . street , sacramento ca 95816 '' . national park service . the characteristics of winters house can be seen in the “ steel pitched hip and gable roof , asymmetrical front façade , two-story angled bay under forward gable , mansard front porch and second story bay windows on both sides of the house . ” the roof of the house made of asphalt shingles and the walls are made from pattern siding covered heart redwood . the foundation of the building is a cement parged brick stem wall and the decorative brick chimneys are part of a coal burning fuel system . the interior of the house reflects the eastlake style in the mantel spindles , the ornate tile work surrounding the two fireplaces , 12-foot second story coved ceilings and other details . the wall cladding in the main house is a horizontal shiplap with vertical lapboard . all of the windows are framed with grooved vertical moulding and other trim work , such as sunbursts above the second story windows . below the cornice , the house also has a frieze board which includes scrollwork sunbursts and stars . in the front porch , above the front doors are cut window panels in jewel tones . the porch has a framing of fans , flowers , dentils and spindlework . the spindlework and stickwork is repeated from the upper porch to the lower porch balustrade . . thomas f . ricks house . thomas f . ricks house is an eastlake movement building in eureka , california . it was built in 1885 and in eureka , the building is the most prominent example of eastlake style . the building had several renovations to parts of the building , leading to the interior having a mixture of period styles . many of the interior millwork were replaced during the hospital renovation in 1907 and in 1952 the dining room and kitchen were constructed in the style of that year . on the second floor , there are two eastlake style bedrooms that have been unchanged . the entry hall of thomas f . ricks house contains a recessed ceiling panel that is outlined with molding ornamented with modillions . a bead course is used for decoration for the staircase newel post and squared balusters have a simple railing . the entry to the living rooms are double pocket doors and the living room ceiling is surrounded with box molding and underneath it , a picture rail . the floor is a carpeted hardwood floor with a plain 12-inch baseboard and all other rooms contain the same floor and ceiling finishes with a few variations in the walls . the victorian rooms ’ surrounds had bullseye corner blocks and lower ceiling finishes . the building is unique in that in eureka , it is the only two-story building that is symmetrical with squared bay windows . other eastlake features of the house include : “ the vertical stripes in the frieze , the brackets extending from the vertical strips , the narrow belt course , the cornice and brackets over the windows , and the wide band of trim under the cornice . ” . spread in the united states . although eastlake 's book hints on household taste in furniture , upholstery and other details was originally released in england and was positively received , its influence was greater in the united states . the book was reprinted four times in england and six times in the united states . however , following the civil war , the middle class desired a design reform due to the increasing awareness of the english movement . in england , eastlake was one of many who desired a design reform , but in america his simplicity and taste were exposed to “ unprecedented new readers . ” the new york times stated that the home furniture was becoming simpler and that “ the demand for extravagant and florid goods for household use ” was gone . in the nineteenth century , as machine-production became more mainstream , many household artists thought that the designs produced lacked artistic characteristics and had untraditional craftsmanship . unlike manmade furniture , artists believed that machine-made furniture did not have holistic designs and “ had a basic form , a skeleton so to speak , to which various moldings and appendages of different styles were hastily applied . ” eastlake , like many others , disliked the machine-produced furniture that replicated handcraftsmanship . he stated that the “ elaboration and finish ” should be a lower priority and most artists concurred that the “ educated ideas of construction and proportion ” were preferred . one person who popularized eastlake 's ideas was henry hudson holly , an architect who wrote multiple articles using eastlake 's book but only cited him once . although holly profited from eastlake 's ideas , he echoed his ideas on furniture . eastlake 's book led to a demand in eastlake furniture ; however , eastlake himself denied that there was an eastlake style . this led to furniture manufacturers—who initially thought that eastlake 's ideas would be more harmful than good—to invent their own eastlake furniture , with it reaching a point that it was “ seen everywhere . ” in 1876 , the centennial exhibition showcased eastlake 's ideas from his book to thousands of americans . while the ‘ old ’ renaissance style was featured in most of the exhibitions , manufacturers were criticized for prioritizing profits over creating well-designed pieces of furniture . following george w . gay 's comment on eastlake having “ far reaching influence ” which could be compared to the best of america 's and europe 's manufacturers , manufacturers of cheap furniture began to use eastlake style whereas before little attention was paid to the appearance . . well-known eastlake style houses . two well-known eastlake style houses in the los angeles area , in echo park and angelino heights , are both on carroll avenue . the first is at 1330 carroll avenue . it was used in michael jackson thriller music video , as well as in episodes of the television show charmed , and was a focus set in the episode '' size matters . '' the second house is at 1329 carroll avenue . the exterior of this house has been shown , in one way or another , in all 178 episodes of charmed , through eight seasons , from 1999 & ndash ; 2006 . in the show the house was dubbed '' halliwell manor '' . the house depicted in the show shares the same house number , 1329 , but is on the fictional prescott street in san francisco . this house is also depicted in the sims video game , where it is a dollhouse . chateau-sur-mer , on bellevue avenue in newport , rhode island , was altered and expanded during the gilded age to incorporate an eastlake style billiard room and bedrooms . glenview mansion , the john bond trevor home , in yonkers , completed in 1877 . glenview is now part of the hudson river museum and has six interpreted period rooms in the eastlake style . westchester : the american suburb ( hudson river museum , 2006 ) . see also . victorian decorative arts : category : victorian architectural styles stick-eastlake . references .