London Metropolitan University

history . london metropolitan university was formed on 1 august 2002 by the merger of london guildhall university and the university of north london . in october 2006 the university opened a new science centre as part of a £30m investment in its science department at the north campus on holloway road , with a '' super lab '' claimed to be one of europe 's most advanced science teaching facilities , and 280 workstations equipped with digital audio visual interactive equipment . london guildhall university . in 1848 charles james blomfield , the bishop of london , called upon the clergy to establish evening classes to improve the moral , intellectual and spiritual condition of young men in london . in response , the bishop charles mackenzie , who instituted the metropolitan evening classes for young men in crosby hall , bishopsgate , london , with student fees at one shilling per session . subjects on the original curriculum included greek , latin , hebrew , english , history , mathematics , drawing and natural philosophy . this fledgling college came under royal patronage following the visit of prince albert to the classes in 1851 . in 1860 the classes moved to sussex hall , the former livery hall of the bricklayers ' company , in leadenhall street . by this time , some 800 students were enrolled annually . in 1861 the classes were reconstituted and named the city of london college . over the next twenty years , the college was one of the pioneers in the introduction of commercial and technical subjects . the college built new premises in white street at a cost of £16,000 ( contributions were received from queen victoria and the prince of wales ) and were opened in 1881 . in 1891 the college joined birkbeck institute and the northampton institute to form the city polytechnic by a charity commissioners ' scheme to facilitate funding for these institutions by the city parochial foundation , and to enable the three institutions to work cooperatively . however this attempted federation did not function in practice , as each institution continued to operate more or less independently . the city polytechnic concept was dissolved in 1906 and the city of london college came under the supervision of london county council . in december 1940 the college 's building was destroyed by a german air raid . city of london college subsequently moved into premises at 84 moorgate in 1944 . in 1948 , the city of london college celebrated its centenary with a service of thanksgiving addressed by the archbishop of canterbury at st paul 's cathedral . in 1970 the college merged with sir john cass college to form the city of london polytechnic . in 1977 it also became the home of the fawcett society library , afterwards the women 's library . under the further and higher education act 1992 the polytechnic was awarded university status ( having previously awarded degrees of the council for national academic awards ) . it was renamed london guildhall university , to demonstrate its links with the city of london and the city 's many guilds/livery companies . it was unassociated with the guildhall school of music and drama , based at the barbican centre . it was ranked 30th out of the uk 's 43 new universities in the 2001 research assessment exercise . in august 2004 , in the midst of a contract dispute with former lgu staff following the merger with the university of north london , it was reported that the management of the merged institution had ordered the destruction of the entire print run of a history of the university – london guildhall university : from polytechnic to university – authored by sean glynn , formerly a senior research fellow in the department of politics and modern history ; the work had been commissioned by sir roderick floud , the president of london metropolitan university , when provost of lgu . '' book pulped at london met '' , times higher education supplement , 27 august 2004 , retrieved 24 october 2014 . the former lgu campus , which was home to london met 's guildhall school of business and law until august 2019 , was located at the intersection of the city of london financial district and the old east end , near aldgate east , tower hill and liverpool street tube stations . there are buildings located at minories , jewry street , central house , moorgate , whitechapel high street , calcutta house , commercial road and goulston street . there is a gymnasium for the use of staff and students at the whitechapel high st . building , . university of north london . founded as the northern polytechnic institute in 1896 , it merged in 1971 with the north western polytechnic which was established in 1929 , to become the polytechnic of north london . until the passing of the education reform act 1988 , the polytechnic was under the control of the inner london education authority – part of the then greater london council and awarded the degrees of the former council for national academic awards . under the further and higher education act 1992 , the institution , a pioneer of widening participation and access to higher education , was granted university status and the right to award its own degrees . following the merger with london guildhall university , london metropolitan university became the largest unitary university in greater london . the former unl campus is now the holloway campus and is located on holloway road , near holloway road and highbury & islington tube stations . dalai lama honorary doctorate controversy . in may 2008 , london metropolitan university presented the 14th dalai lama with an honorary doctorate of philosophy , london metropolitan university – dalai lama visits , times higher education supplement 29 may 2008 for '' promoting peace globally '' . uk university honours dalai lama , bbc 20 may 2008 this move caused controversy among the chinese public and the overseas chinese community , who view the dalai lama as partly responsible for the 2008 tibetan unrest . as a result , chinese migration agents had been reported to '' boycott '' london metropolitan university in advising clients who wish to study in the uk . 多家留学中介表示抵制挺 '' 藏独 '' 英国高校 ( several overseas study agencies say they will boycott british university that supports tibetan independence ) , global daily , 13 june 2008 the university 's vice-chancellor , brian roper , in july sent a controversial public letter of apology to the chinese foreign ministry via embassy officials . in an interview with the global times , a worker at a chinese study abroad agency suggested that the university could repair the offence of the honours by refusing speaking platforms to tibetan independence groups , such as the university 's own '' free tibet society '' . the university has also faced criticism for offering free scholarships specifically reserved for students from the tibetan exile community in india , nepal and the west , in a case of non-merit '' racial quotas '' . . student numbers controversy . in july 2008 it was reported that a financial crisis was looming for the university . london met had allegedly been misreporting data on student drop-outs for several years and , consequently , the higher education funding council for england ( hefce ) was proposing to reclaim at least £15 & nbsp ; million for the overpayment in 2008–9 . in february 2009 the overpayment figure was revised to £56 & nbsp ; million by hefce , who were seeking to recover the money . on 19 march 2009 , in response to the crisis , vice-chancellor brian roper resigned his position with immediate effect but continued to receive his salary until december 2009 . in may 2009 alfred morris , former vice-chancellor of the university of the west of england and university of wales , lampeter , was appointed interim vice-chancellor . the government announced in may 2009 that there would be an independent inquiry , exploring the possibility that hefce had colluded with london met by failing to query implausibly low drop-out rates . melanie newman , '' government announces inquiry into london met crisis '' , times higher education , 21 may 2009 the inquiry concluded in november 2009 and was reported to attribute responsibility to vice-chancellor brian roper , along with other senior administrators and the board of governors . following completion of the report , the chair of hefce called on '' senior staff '' and the entire board of governors to resign , noting that hefce was not convinced that the university 's management could effectively safeguard public funds . lucy hodges and richard garner , '' university accused of £36m student scam '' the independent , 22 november 2009 after the deadline indicated by hefce chief executive alan langlands had expired , rumours circulated among staff and government ministers that hefce could withdraw funding , effectively forcing the university to close . lucy hodges and richard garner , '' london met warned that it could be closed '' , the independent , 7 december 2009 a report commissioned by the university , published in november 2009 , found that vice-chancellor roper bore '' the major responsibility and culpability '' for the financial situation : roper and some members of the executive had been aware that the university had been applying its own interpretation of funding rules on student drop-outs – rather than the funding council 's – since 2003 , but had taken no action . the university 's board of governors and audit committee had an oversight role , which made them ultimately '' accountable for a financial failure of this magnitude '' and this meant that they '' must take overall responsibility '' . . 2011 course changes . in early 2011 , london metropolitan university announced an overhaul of undergraduate education for students entering courses in 2012 . this included a reduction in the number of courses from 557 to 160 . the announcement also signalled a move from semester-long to year-long modules , and thirty weeks of teaching , a gain of six weeks on the current average . the university argues that the longer learning time will help increase the opportunity for development and guidance before students move to final examinations . london metropolitan university , '' new directions at london met '' , new directions at london met , 6 may 2011 there will be a transition to this new course offering in 2011/12 and this has led to applicants for some courses being contacted and offered alternative programmes . john morgan , '' london met applicants trapped in limbo by course closures and ucas deadline '' , times higher education , 5 may 2011 . proposed alcohol-free zones . in april 2012 the university was reported to be considering creating alcohol-free zones and events to enable muslim students ( who form 20 % of the student population ) to take part more comfortably . this provoked criticism from the muslim council of britain and the university 's islamic societies , who described the proposal as unhelpful and '' divisive '' , but positive comments from representatives of the national union of students and the federation of student islamic societies . . uk home office/border agency action , and consequences . on 16 july 2012 the uk border agency of the home office suspended the university 's '' highly-trusted status '' with the border agency , a status required in order for the university to be eligible to sponsor both new student visa applications as well as existing student visas , for foreign students from outside of the european union and the european economic area ( or switzerland ) . the university was one of three institutions to have such a status suspended . on 30 august 2012 , the university 's highly trusted status was revoked , revoking the university 's right to sponsor new visa applications for non-eu/eea foreign students , as well as revoking the existing visas of the university 's pre-existing non-european foreign students , causing them to be excluded from the university , and leaving thousands with the possibility of being forced to leave the country , unless places with alternative institutions and sponsors are secured . london metropolitan 's visa licence revoked the immigration minister , damian green , cited a number of reasons for the decision , including the discovery that more than a quarter of the students in the test sample did not in fact have leave to remain in the uk , that the university did not have and could not provide sufficient proof of english-language proficiency standards for some of its students , and the fact that the university was unable to confirm the attendance of its students , in some 57 % of the sampled cases . in september the university announced it was beginning legal action against the border agency over the licence issue . in april 2013 the university regained its licence to sponsor international students for tier 4 visas . the high court case against home office was settled in october 2013 after both parties reached an undisclosed settlement . both parties have refused to comment on the specifics of the settlement . the last minute withdrawal of the case meant that the judicial review against the home office , which had been scheduled to start on 17 october 2013 , would not proceed any further . . campuses . the main university campus is on holloway road in the london borough of islington where five of the university 's schools are based . the school of art , architecture and design is based in aldgate . academic profile . london metropolitan offers about 160 degree courses , to students ( including 7,000 overseas students from 155 countries ) . the university also maintains several offices abroad in beijing , chennai , delhi , dhaka , lagos and lahore . the university 's operations are overseen by a board of governors comprising external members and senior administrative and academic staff . academic departments . the university 's academic departments are currently arranged into six schools , where previously there were four faculties each comprising three schools . these are : : guildhall school of business and law : school of computing and digital media : school of human sciences : school of social professions : school of social sciences : school of art , architecture and design . scholarships . the university invests over £700,000 annually in its scholarship programme to help academically excellent students as well as students with outstanding achievements in various sports disciplines , such as hockey , tennis and basketball . merit scholarships – london metropolitan university website the university gives £1000 for any of its undergraduate international students who achieve ' a ' grade marks . the university also offers postgraduate scholarships , a range of full tuition scholarships , including some scholarships with free accommodation . scholarships are offered in conjunction the bbc world service , international student house and mahatma gandhi foundation . the university has several student exchange programmes with academic institutions in the us and europe , with financial support for those who participate through the erasmus programme . rankings and reputation . in the past , the university refused to participate in newspaper league tables on the grounds that universities should be assessed by the uk government and not ( private ) newspapers . the new management reversed this policy and in the 2013 rankings ( published in 2012 ) , the university was placed 118th out of 120 universities in the guardian university guide 2013 . in the 2011 institutional audit , the quality assurance agency expressed '' reasonable confidence '' in the '' academic standards '' of the university 's awards . in the 2008 research assessment exercise , london metropolitan was ranked equal 107th out of 132 institutions by the times higher education 's rae league table . the university has not fared well in the most recent national league tables ( 2014/2015 ) and has placed last in each respective league table , guardian university guide 2015 ( 116th ) , complete university guide 2015 ( 123rd ) and the times and sunday times university league table 2014 ( 121st ) . the architecture department was ranked 18th and 20th in 2011 and 2012 in the guardian university league tables . american studies placed 20th , 17th and 18th in 2011 , 2012 and more recently , at the newly published complete university guide 2013 . the law school ranked 87th in 2011 at the complete university guide and rose to 85th in 2012 , 75th in 2013 and most recently placed 70th out of 98 law schools at the 2014 complete university guide . it is also ranked 58th out of 96 in research assessment . the university also entered the qs world university rankings of top universities in the world for the first time placing at 801-1000 bracket . . student life . students ' union . london metropolitan university students ' union ( metsu ) is the students ' union for students at london metropolitan university . it provides representation , advice and support to students at the university . metsu is run by five full-time sabbatical officers and five part-time officers . metsu has two offices , in city at cm2-22 calcutta house , old castle street and on north campus at tower building room no tmg-74-75 , 166–220 holloway road . student media . student media at london metropolitan university include : verve magazine – launched in 2009 by journalism students ; articles about the university , general politics , entertainment , lifestyle , fashion and sports . verve radio – launched in 2011 as a platform for student thoughts and opinions ; regular shows hosted by student djs . dictum – launched in 2010 by law students ; articles on law , politics and international relations ; notable guest writers include supreme court judge robert walker and writer , blogger and barrister tim kevan . . notable people . notable alumni . . arts and media . helen baker , author john box obe , academy award and bafta-winning british film production designer and art director noel clarke , director , screenwriter and actor alannah currie , artist james hyman , dj , radio & tv presenter , music supervisor and md of jlh . henry irving , first english stage actor to be awarded a knighthood will kirk , furniture restorer , the repair shop j . w . r . linton , west australian artist and teacher maimie mccoy , actress tom mcrae , english singer-songwriter alison moyet , pop singer michael petry , multi-media artist , director of moca london , and co-founder of the museum of installation , london vic reeves , comedian daniela ruah , actress , most notably ncis : los angeles edwin smith , photographer adaora onyechere , a nigerian tv/radio presenter , entrepreneur , motivational speaker and author . irwin sparkes , front-man of pop band the hoosiers matthew sweeney , irish poet neil tennant , from the pet shop boys ( 1972–75 history , north london polytechnic ) aj tracey , musician ( dropped out ) jamie theakston , tv presenter eamonn walker , english film , television and theatre actor oritsé williams , member of pop band jls ( did not graduate ) tracey emin , english artist , was awarded a doctor of philosophy from london metropolitan university xatar , german rapper and record label executive ( did not graduate ) . business , marketing and law . william neville bingley , lawyer and academic known as the architect of code of practice for the mental health act 1983 rowan carstairs , 1973–1977 ( philosophy : north london polytechnic ) entrepreneur , writer , and social housing advocate . edward george clarke , victorian british barrister and politician ian m . cook , chairman , president and chief executive officer of colgate-palmolive . harry henry , one of britain 's market research pioneers and last survivor of the 23 founders of the market research society ( mrs ) kojo jones , a ghanaian business mogul and the founder of empire domus . nick leeson trader with barings bank who brought about its collapse jane shepherdson , chief executive of uk clothing brand , whistles and was brand director for topshop . politics and public affairs . adel mouwda , deputy speaker of bahrain 's first elected parliament and president of salafist party , asalah graham allen , member of parliament ( 1974 , city of london polytechnic ) candy atherton , british journalist and former member of parliament ( 1985 , ba applied social studies , polytechnic of north london ) julie bindel , english writer , feminist and co-founder of the group justice for women ( researcher ) james brokenshire , member of parliament jeremy corbyn , former leader of the labour party ( trade union studies , north london polytechnic : did not graduate ) kate hoey , member of parliament ( economics , city of london college ) sadiq khan , member of parliament and mayor of london ( 1992 , law , university of north london ) nainendra nand , former solicitor-general of fiji from 1997 to 2000 christine russell , former member of parliament david shaw , former member of parliament rainatou sow , women 's rights campaigner peter tatchell , human rights campaigner ( 1973 , bsc sociology , polytechnic of north london ) pola uddin , baroness uddin , labour politician and community activist charlie whelan , gordon brown 's former spin doctor malcolm wicks , member of parliament nnamdi kanu , nigerian-british director of radio biafra and founder of indigenous people of biafra ( ipob ) , an african separatist group . royalty . otumfuo nana osei tutu ii , king of the ashantiman in ghana , attended the polytechnic of north london . sciences . d . bernard amos , professor of immunology and experimental surgery at duke university ( 1962–1993 ) , attended sir john cass technical school harshad bhadeshia , professor of metallurgy at the university of cambridge , attended city of london polytechnic edward charles bowra , sinologist and botanist , attended city of london college edward robert harrison , astronomer and cosmologist noted for his explanation of olbers ' paradox . sports . garth crooks , former football player david goodchild , former english cricketer . notable staff . patrick brill , artist maurice glasman , lord glasman peter gowan , left-wing intellectual and editor of new left review miriam green , management studies stephen haseler , politician and writer sadiq khan , member of parliament and mayor of london tony mcnulty , former member of parliament sunny singh , writer paul st george , artist kate soper , philosopher margot sunderland , children 's psychologist and author of popular books a . j . p . taylor , historian nicholas troop , health psychologist . references . external links . london met student union