Facel Vega

business history . facel was founded on 20 december 1939 by bronzavia , a french manufacturer of military aircraft , to make special components . marcel koehler ( formerly of motorcycle manufacturer koehler-escoffier ) directed facel from 1939 to 1945 . he gave way to jean daninos when he returned from the united states , summoned by henri feuillée , the ex-boss of bronzavia and a large shareholder of facel . jean daninos had begun his career with citroen , where he assisted in the design of the traction coupés and cabriolets . he moved to morane-saulnier , then in 1937 to bronzavia as technical director . during wwii he worked in the usa with general aircraft , which was using bronzavia patents , but he returned in 1945 and took charge of facel . daninos merged facel with metallon , a tie maintained until january 1953 . the story facel-vega by amicale facel vega . retrieved april 13 , 2020 . daninos started facel manufacturing short-run and special complete finished bodies for the major french brands . in conjunction with l'aluminium français facel designed the all-aluminium alloy panhard dyna x and then built around 45,000 examples for panhard . ; luxury cars a luxury car division was established in 1948 . it made various models of simca 8 and drew publicity by designing with farina and then building a special body on a bentley mark vi chassis . the car was named the bentley cresta . the exercise was repeated in 1951 and named cresta ii . september 1951 saw the introduction of its ford comète . production of the comète ended in 1955 when simca took over ford france . the styling of the crestas and comètes was developed into the shape of the first vega . ; scooter bodies , truck bodies , tractor bodies , jeeps and smaller components during the same period facel-metallon pressed out body panels for delahaye 's army jeeps ( painted and upholstered ) ; simca , delahaye and somua 's trucks ( painted and upholstered ) ; scooters by vespa , piaggio and motobécane ; tractors by massey-ferguson ; and stainless-steel bumpers , hubcaps and grilles for simca/ford and for renault . ; aviation in conjunction with hispano-suiza , facel-metallon and facel also turned out combustion chambers in special metals for rolls-royce jet engines . file : panhard dyna 247.jpg panhard dyna x décapotable file : simca 8 sport cabriolet 001.jpg simca 8 sport cabriolet ford comete.jpg ford comète coupé simca 9 sport coupe dutch licence registration am-20-65 pic3.jpg simca 9 sport coupé file : simca aronde coupé ( 7496025116 ) . jpg simca aronde coupé . facel vega . the facel vega marque was created in 1954 by jean daninos , ( brother of the humorist pierre daninos , who wrote les carnets du major thompson ) , although the facel company had been established by the bronzavia company in 1939 as a subcontracting company for the aviation industry . facel ( forges et ateliers de construction d'eure-et-loir , in english : forge and construction workshop of the department of eure-et-loir ) was initially a metal-stamping company but it expanded into car manufacturing in the early 1950s . facel entered the automobile business as a supplier of special bodies for panhard , delahaye and simca . facel vega fv , hk500 and facel vega ii . the vega production cars ( fv , later and more famously the hk500 ) appeared in 1954 using chrysler v8 engines , at first a desoto hemi engine ; the overall engineering was straightforward , with a tubular chassis , double wishbone suspension at the front and a beam axle at the back , as in standard american practice . they were also as heavy as american cars , at about . performance was brisk , with a top speed of around and 0 to in just under 10 seconds . most cars were two-door hardtops with no centre pillar , but a few convertibles were built . fully 77 % of production was exported , due to the punitive tax horsepower system in france . the 1956 model was improved with a bigger chrysler engine and updated transmission and other mechanicals . in the same year production began of a four-door model , the excellence , with rear-hinged doors ( suicide doors ) at the back and no centre pillar . the pillarless design unfortunately made it less rigid and the handling was thus poorer than that of the two-door cars , and surviving examples are rare . 1959 models had even bigger engines , a and later a chrysler v8 , and were quite a bit faster despite their extra weight . the final evolution of the v8 models came in 1962 with the facel vega ii , which was lighter , with sleeker , more modern lines , substantially faster , and famously elegant . facellia . thumb in 1960 , facel entered the sports car market with the facellia , a small car similar in size to the then popular mercedes 190sl . facellias were advertised in three body styles : cabriolet , 2+2 coupé and 4-seat coupé — all with the same mechanical parts and a wheelbase . styling was similar to the facel hk500 , but with rather elegant ( though fingernail-breaking ) flush door handles . following facel vega 's demise several of m daninos 's styling cues were '' borrowed '' by mercedes-benz . prices were roughly us 4,000 for the facellia , us 5,500 for the facel iii and us 6,000 for the facel 6 . with the idea of creating a mass-produced all-french sports car competing with the alfa romeos , facel moved away from american engines . the facellia had a 4-cylinder 1.6 & nbsp ; l dohc engine built in france by paul cavallier of the pont-à-mousson company ( which already provided manual gear boxes for the company 's larger models ) . the engine had only two bearings supporting each camshaft , using special steels , as opposed to the usual four or five . despite the metallurgical experience of pont-à-mousson , this resulted in excessive flex , timing problems and frequent failures . famed engineers charles deutsch and jean bertin were called in to solve the issues , but it was not enough and the engine was pronounced a disaster and the facellia with it . company president , jean daninos having been obliged to resign in august 1961 in response to the company 's financial problems , the new boss , a former oil company executive called andré belin , gave strict instructions to the after-sales department to respond to customer complaints about broken facellia engines by replacing the units free of charge without creating '' difficulties '' . the strategy was intended to restore confidence among the company 's customer base . it would certainly have created a large hole in the income statement under the '' warranty costs '' heading , but it may have been too late for customer confidence . ; volvo engine the troublesome powerplant was replaced with a volvo b18 engine in the facel iii , but the damage was done . production was stopped in 1963 and despite the vision of it being a '' volume '' car , only 1,100 were produced - still enough to make this facel 's highest production number . facel lost money on every car they built , with the luxury car side of the company being supported entirely by the other work done by facel metallon . the small facellia met with little success and the losses from this , due to strong competition at the luxury end of the market , killed off the business which closed its doors at the end of october , 1964 . what was , according to some , the best small facel , the facel 6 , which used an austin-healey 2.8-litre engine , came too late to save the company with fewer than 30 having been produced when the financial guarantors withdrew their support . prominence . prominent owners of facel vegas ( mainly of facel iis ) included pablo picasso , ava gardner , christian dior , herb alpert , joan collins , ringo starr , max factor jr , joan fontaine , stirling moss , tony curtis , several saudi princes , dean martin , fred astaire , danny kaye , louis malle , the president of mexico , françois truffaut , robert wagner , anthony quinn , hassan ii of morocco , debbie reynolds , the shah of persia , frank sinatra , maurice trintignant , brian rix , joe hepworth and french embassies around the world . hervé alphand , the french ambassador to the united states , used theirs , an excellence , from 1956 to 1965 . it was sold bonhams in philadelphia 8 oct 2012 for 159,000 . race-car driver stirling moss would drive his hk500 from event to event rather than fly . french writer and nobel prize winner albert camus died in a facel vega fv3b driven by his publisher , michel gallimard . at the time of his death , camus had planned to travel by train , with his wife and children , but at the last minute accepted his publisher 's proposal to travel with him . in the 1989 film dealers , paul mcgann , as daniel pascoe , drives a facel ll . a facel vega hk500 appears in computer-animated form in the film ratatouille ( pixar , 2007 ) , driven by one of the main characters . a facel vega facellia appeared in the music video for caravan palace 's dramophone . a 1958 facel vega hk500 appeared in the 1961 movie goodbye again starring ingrid bergman , yves montand and anthony perkins . chief inspector swan laurence drives a wine-red facel véga facellia f2 coupé in the television series les petits meurtres d'agatha christie , season 2 ( 2013 ) . . models . vega fv facel vega fvs facel vega hk500 facel vega ii facel vega excellence facel vega facellia facel iii facel 6 . references . external links . the facel véga home page facel vega club germany + spare parts ! motorbase profile facel vega article on allpar retro website about facel vega