Olaf Guthfrithson

biography . olaf first conclusively appears in contemporary records in 933 when the annals describe him plundering armagh on 10 november . hudson2004 he is then recorded as allying with matudán mac áeda , overking of ulaid and raiding as far as sliabh beagh , where they were met by an army led by muirchertach mac néill of ailech , and lost 240 men in the ensuing battle along with much of their plunder . an earlier reference to a '' son of gofraid '' who plundered the monastery at kildare in 928 might refer to olaf but no name is given . downham , pp . 243–244 olaf 's father gofraid ua ímair , king of dublin , died in 934 and olaf succeeded him as king . cannon , p . 479 the following year olaf carried out a raid at lagore crannog in county meath , and then looted the burial chamber at knowth the following week . olaf is described as '' lord of the foreigners '' by the annals of the four masters in 937 , a4m , s.a . 937 at which time he went to lough ree and captured amlaíb cenncairech , king of limerick , and his troops after breaking their boats . this conflict can be ascribed to rivalry between the competing viking settlements of dublin and limerick , with this event marking victory for dublin . this period is considered to be the high-point of viking influence in ireland . downham , pp . 41–42 having secured his position in ireland , olaf turned his attention to england and northumbria , which had once been ruled by olaf 's father and had been conquered in 927 by æthelstan . olaf allied with constantine ii of scotland , whose kingdom had been invaded by æthelstan in 934 , and in 937 , the same year as the victory over limerick , olaf and the vikings of dublin left for england . downham , p . 104–106 the allied forces of olaf and constantine met the forces of æthelstan at the battle of brunanburh , at a site which is the subject of much debate , although current scholarly consensus identifies the site as bromborough in cheshire . roffe , p . 120 olaf and constantine commanded the viking troops while æthelstan alongside his brother edmund led the english troops into the battle . contemporary accounts indicate both sides suffered many casualties but the result was a decisive english victory . olaf and constantine survived the battle and returned to ireland and scotland respectively , but one of constantine 's sons died . the battle is well-attested , with references in irish chronicles , and a battle of brunanburh ( poem ) in the anglo-saxon chronicle . a4m , s.a . 938 asc , pp . 86–88 the numerous references to it in various chronicles throughout the british isles testify to its perceived importance at the time . the annals record olaf 's return to ireland in 938 as well as a raid he carried out that year on kilcullen in modern-day county kildare , where he is said to have taken a thousand prisoners . æthelstan died in october 939 and very soon afterwards olaf left for york where he was able to quickly establish himself as scandinavian york . olaf was joined in england by his cousin olaf cuaran , and olaf 's brother blácaire was left to rule in dublin while he was away . forteoram & pedersen , p . 115 downham , pp . 107–110 symeon of durham 's historia regum records that olaf and the new english king edmund met at leicester in 939 and came to an agreement on dividing england between the two of them . hb , pp . 23–24 , n . 155 this peace was short-lived and within a few years of the agreement the vikings had seized the five boroughs of derby , leicester , lincoln , nottingham and stamford . in 941 the chronicle of melrose records that olaf raided an ancient angles church at tyninghame in what is now the scottish borders and at the time was a part of northumbria . com , p . 97 stenton , p . 357 this attack may have been more than just a raid , and may have been intended to secure a route through scotland upon which communication between york and dublin was reliant . forteoram & pedersen , p . 111 olaf died in 941 and he was succeeded in northumbria by olaf cuaran . in recording his death , the annals title him '' king of danes '' ( chronicon scotorum ) and '' king of the dubgaill and finngaill '' ( annals of clonmacnoise ) . cs , s.a . 941 aclon , p . 152 . burial . in 2005 a skeleton was excavated in an archaeological dig at auldhame , east lothian . grave goods including a belt similar to others known to have been worn in viking-age ireland indicate that the skeleton belonged to a high-status individual . the presence of such goods , and the age of the skeleton , has led to speculation among historians and archaeologists that the remains could be those of olaf . olaf is known to have conducted raids on auldhame and tyninghame shortly before his death in 941 . auldhame and tyninghame were two of several local churches dedicated to saint baldred . according to alex woolf , although the skeleton can not be definitively identified with olaf , the date and nature of the burial make it very likely the deceased individual died as a consequence of olaf 's attacks in the area in 941 . woolf has also suggested that '' there is a strong likelihood that the king ’ s followers hoped that by burying him in the saint ’ s cemetery he might have benefitted from some sort of post-mortem penance '' . . family . olaf 's father is identifiable as gofraid , who was king of dublin between 920 and 934 , and also briefly ruled northumbria in 927 . downham , p . 29 hart gofraid was a grandson of ímar but no patronymic is given in the original sources . this may be because he was a child of a son of ímar who never ruled dublin , or he was a child of a daughter of ímar , which in either case would mean his legitimacy to rule in the eyes of his contemporaries was dependent on the identity of his grandfather , not his parents . downham , p . 33–34 ímar , possibly identical to ivar the boneless , was the founder of the uí ímair and was one of the earliest kings of dublin in the mid-ninth century . bartlettjeffrey1997 , p . 44 three other individuals are identifiable as sons of gofraid ; albann , blácaire and ragnall . albann was killed in battle against muirchertach mac néill in 926 . downham , p . 238 blácaire ruled dublin from 939 onwards , and ragnall mac gofraid ruled northumbria in 943 and 944 , probably along with his cousin olaf cuaran , until they were driven out by edmund i . downham , pp . 111–112 john of worcester , writing in the twelfth century , claimed that olaf had married a daughter of constantine ii of scotland prior to 937 , but this evidence is considered unreliable . downham , p . 150 the thirteenth century chronicler roger of wendover wrote that olaf married aldgyth , the daughter of a northumbrian earl called orm as a consequence of the agreement at leicester between olaf and king edmund . hb , pp . 25–26 , n . 166 an individual named cammán mac amlaíb is identifiable as a son of olaf . the annals of ulster record he was defeated at a place called dub in 960 . cammán may have been one of the meic amlaíb ( sons of olaf ) who the annals of the four masters mention in 962 . au , s.a . 960 downham , p . 249 downham , p . 262 a4m , s.a . 962 according to this account the sons of olaf and the ladgmanns ( lawmen ) came to ireland and plundered conaille muirtheimne and howth . afterward the lawmen went to munster to avenge their brother oin . they continued the plunder there and were defeated by the irish in uí liatháin where 365 of them died . in the same year an unnamed son of olaf led a raid from ireland 's eye on anglesey and britain . cammán may be identical to sitriuc cam , an individual who in 962 made a naval attack on uí cholgain , but was forced to flee back to ships after a force of dubliners and leinstermen overtook him and slaughtered some of his men . downham , p . 269 an individual named gofraid mac amlaíb recorded by the annals as dying in 963 may have been a son of olaf or he may have been a son of olaf cuaran . downham , p . 253 the annals of clonmacnoise list an ímar , a '' son of the king '' , among the dead at brunanburh who might be a son of olaf , although the origin of this list is uncertain . aclon , p . 151 downham , p . 259 . family tree . . notes . references . citations . . primary sources . accessed via internet archive . accessed via internet archive . accessed via internet archive . secondary sources . subscription or uk public library membership required . subscription or uk public library membership required . . external links . celt : corpus of electronic texts at university college cork . the corpus of electronic texts includes the annals of ulster and the four masters , the chronicon scotorum and the book of leinster as well as genealogies , and various saints ' lives . most are translated into english , or translations are in progress .