Canal du Midi

the canal in the 21st century . from the end of the 20th century , the canal has offered many activities . it can again play its original role in allowing the transit of boats between the atlantic ocean and the mediterranean sea . a canal for tourism and recreation . the canal du midi is now used primarily by tourists , recreation , and housing . rené gast , the canal du midi and the navigable waterways from the atlantic to the mediterranean , rennes : ed . ouest-france , 2000 , 125 pages , , p . 23 . it attracts more and more boat tour , including sailing on chartered boats , restaurant-boats , or hotel barges such as the anjodi . tourism has grown from the 1960s , most significantly from britain , and then exploded in the 1980s . the canal was featured prominently in the bbc television series rick stein 's french odyssey ( 2005 ) , further publicising the canal to a british audience . busier than the seine , the canal alone accounts for one-fifth of french river tourism and 80 % of passengers are foreigners , primarily germans , swiss and british . there are approximately 10,000 boat passages per year through the fonserannes lock , with the most traffic at the argens lock with 11,000 boats carrying an average of five passengers . the canal directly employs about 1,900 people , and the annual economic impact due to the activity of the canal is about 122 million euros . navigation of the channel is open from the third saturday in march to the first week of november . outside of this period , navigation can be authorized for individuals who have requested it . the winter period is called the '' period of unemployment '' and allows the completion of all maintenance work . rené gast , the canal du midi and the navigable waterways from the atlantic to the mediterranean , rennes : ed . ouest-france , 2000 , 125 pages , , p . 49 . the canal du midi also allows other sports , mainly in urban areas , such as rowing , canoeing , fishing , cycling , roller-skating , and hiking along the banks . a paved stretch of 50 & nbsp ; km from toulouse to avignonet-lauragais and another of 12 & nbsp ; km between béziers and portiragnes are particularly suited to cycling and rollerblading . it is possible to cycle the entire canal des deux mers from sète to bordeaux . in addition , many barges have been converted to family housing , theatres , exhibition spaces , and restaurants . a canal for water . during the dry season , the canal serves as a reservoir for agriculture . nearly 700 irrigation pumps are installed along the canal . this is one of the fundamental roles of the canal and one of the reasons for its maintenance by the state since the end of commercial traffic . the canal can irrigate up to 40,000 hectares of agricultural land . economy of the canal , consulted on 29 august 2007 . the rigole de la plaine carries water from the sor tapped from an offtake at pont crouzet for irrigation before emptying into the canal du midi . in addition , individual samples are collected from the water on the area between revel and the seuil de naurouze . cammazes sector , institution interdépartemental pour l'aménagement hydraulique de la montagne noire , consulted on 31 august 2007 . in 1980 the lac de la ganguise was built near castelnaudary providing a water reserve of 22 million cubic metres . in 2005 the dam was raised to reach a capacity of 44 million cubic metres . project to enlarge lake ganguise near the old basin of naurouze the naurouze pumping station helps to regulate the water in the canal du midi and the lake . an underground pipe , the gallery of mandore , provides the naurouze with additional water from the rigole de la plaine to lake ganguise . conversely , during the dry season , lake ganguise can supply the canal du midi if the water supply of the rigole de la plaine is not enough . the canal has also provided a supply of drinking water through the water treatment plants at picotalen ( picotalen i and picotalen ii ) since 1973 . they are part of the installations installed by the institution for interdepartmental hydraulic planning of montagne noire ( iiahmn ) since its inception in 1948 to meet the water needs of lauragais . the plant supplies water from the cammazes channel to nearly 185 communes . corinne labat , robert fuggetta , guy jungblut , marvin holdt , and gilles bernard , the canal du midi , from the 17th to the 21st centuries , portet-sur-garonne : empreinte , dl 2006 , 168 pages , pp . 4–5 . . the canal as heritage . while the canal was once seen as a tool of production , trade , and commerce it is now considered to be architectural and technical heritage as evidenced by the refusal of the mayor of toulouse , pierre baudis , to allow space on the canal du midi to be used for an urban expressway . michel cotte , canal du midi , marvel of europe , paris : belin , 2003 , 191 pages , , p . 149 . it has not been downgraded and remains open for navigation . on 7 december 1996 the channel and a buffer zone of 2,000 & nbsp ; km were included in the list of world heritage sites by unesco . in the same year , it was classified under french law as a grand site of france . this classification was extended to the canals of the plain and the mountain in 1996 and 2001 . it caused a very rapid increase in tourist numbers . nevertheless , maintenance has not been carried out completely because many players are involved : three regions , six departments , and local collective authorities . none wish to bear the cost of restoration and do not always dare to launch development programs . platanus ( plane trees ) is a particular source of problems because their roots destroy the banks and the paved cycle paths and their leaves invade the canal . corinne labat , robert fuggetta , guy jungblut , marvin holdt , and gilles bernard , the canal du midi , from the 17th to the 21st centuries , portet-sur-garonne : empreinte , dl 2006 , 168 pages , p . 4 . in addition they are weakened by disease ( canker of platanus ) . the canal is a heavy heritage to maintain and enhance as the manager of french canals , voies navigables de france ( vnf ) , specializes in the management and maintenance of french canals in a market and commercial economy and not in the tourism market where the canal du midi is located . in addition maintenance costs are higher than in a traditional network because of the age of the canal . also , the operation of the channel generates low levels of earnings . vnf must try to establish local partnerships to develop and maintain the canal report of the inspector-general of architecture and heritage 2003 , p . 11 . since its budget does not allow it to provide the care and supervision of 360 & nbsp ; km of canals . the classification as a world heritage site creates an additional level of oversight by the state who must ensure that any changes along the canal and its structures are compatible with the strategic issues of unesco . however , a report of the general inspectorate of architecture and heritage in 2003 showed that the channel was in very poor condition with many works and infrastructure devaluing its surroundings and suffering from significant housing pressure evidenced by uncontrolled construction , poorly designed facilities that misrepresent the site , and the construction of marinas in the ports on the canal . nevertheless , to respect the uniformity of the canal development and support efforts for improvement , the canal du midi remains under the management of vnf under the tutelage of the state who want to create a monitoring mission like the loire and mont-saint-michel . for more information on the maintenance and exploitation see inter-regional directorate of the south-west vnf at toulouse . the structures . the canal du midi is 240 & nbsp ; km long with a total of 328 structures canal du midi . the route - the structures , on canal-du-midi.org including 63 locks , the number here is the number of separate locations of locks . the numbers given in locks on the canal du midi count the number of individual lock chambers hence the discrepancy 126 bridges , 55 aqueducts , 7 aqueducts , 6 dams , 1 spillway , and 1 tunnel . water supply for the canal . it takes 90 million cubic metres of water to feed the canal for one year . michel cotte , canal du midi , marvel of europe , paris : belin , 2003 , 191 pages , , p . 29 . to do this , riquet set up a complex system of water supply to the canal . the idea was to capture the waters of the montagne noire located several tens of kilometres away and bring it to the seuil de naurouze , the highest point of the future canal , through channels . these channels , called '' rigole de la montagne '' ( channel of the mountain ) and '' rigole de la plaine '' ( channel of the plain ) connected the upper three reservoirs ( lampy , cammazes , and saint-ferréol ) at the seuil de naurouze . the rigole de la montagne measured 24.269 & nbsp ; km long and has 22 structures travelers guide to the canal du midi , réédition 1853 , p . 160 . between the outlet at alzeau and the falls of cammazes . the rigole de la plaine measured 38.121 & nbsp ; km long at 21.45m altitude and included 68 structures between the crouzet bridge and the seuil de naurouze . travelers guide to the canal du midi , réédition 1853 , p . 163 . initially , two reservoirs fed the highest point of the canal at the seuil de naurouze : the bassin de saint-ferréol had a capacity of 6.3 & nbsp ; million cubic metres and was built between 1667 and 1672 . bernard blancotte , the canal du midi , the work of a titan , p . 137 . the other reservoir was much smaller - the bassin de lampy . called '' lampy-vieux '' , it was quickly replaced by the '' lampy-neuf '' supply system of the montagne noire , edition 1993 , p . 12 . with a capacity of 1,672,000 cubic metres built over a hundred years later between 1777 and 1782 . bernard blancotte , the canal du midi , the work of a titan , p . 138 . the bassin de saint-ferréol was and remains the main water reservoir for the canal with a surface of 67 hectares . it receives the waters of the montagne noire via the channel of the mountain which is itself supplied by the basin of lampy . the lake waters are retained by a dam 786m long and 149m wide consisting of three parallel walls . the channel surrounds the basin and can evacuate any excess water . a museum is located near the outlets and has displays on the history of the construction of the lake . rené gast , the canal du midi and the navigable waterways from the atlantic to the mediterranean , rennes : ed . ouest-france , 2000 , 125 pages , , p . 39 . originally the engineer planned and built a third reservoir , the naurouze , but it was abandoned in 1680 due to its excessive silting . michel cotte , canal du midi , marvel of europe , paris : belin , 2003 , 191 pages , , p . 28 . pierre-paul riquet had dreamed of the construction of a new city around this basin that never saw the day . a floodway was quickly dug to drain the naurouze basin from the south . other reservoirs were also built at carcassonne to supply the lower part of the canal to the mediterranean . so the waters of the fresquel , the cesse , and the orbiel augmented those of the canal . on the other hand , the waters of the orb at beziers provided additional flow to part of the canal . in 1957 the cammazes dam with a capacity of 20 million cubic metres of water was filled on the sor which completed and finalized the supply network . this lake provides drinking water to more than 200 communes in the region . of the 20 & nbsp ; million cubic metres , 4 & nbsp ; million are reserved for feeding the canal du midi . supply of water to the canal , canal-du-midi.org , consulted on 16 october 2007 . . the locks . the first locks built on the toulouse plain by pierre-paul riquet were experimental and were not satisfactory . they consisted of rectangular locks with wooden stilts as foundations for the side walls . this form did not properly restrain the lateral material when the lock was empty . they then collapsed on themselves . he redefined the shape of his locks to rounded side walls , protective walls in the chamber of the lock thicker , and more resistant to the lateral pressure of the earth . the dimensions of the locks were then large enough for the time . because of these rounded forms , the architecture of the locks in the canal du midi is called baroque style . michel cotte , canal du midi , marvel of europe , paris : belin , 2003 , 191 pages , , p . 57 . the locks were built in stone and sealed with lime . they are closed by two double leaf doors . the locks , consulted on 4 september 2007 . the doors , originally timber with the fewest possible metal parts , are subject to severe moisture stress and pressure . they had a '' vantelle '' ( valve ) controlled by a rack and pinion that allowed the draining of water from the lock chamber . the nominal size of the locks built by pierre-paul riquet was 29.2m long , 5.8m wide at the door , 11m wide in the centre of the lock and an average of 2.5 m in height . in the 20th century , many locks were changed and therefore no longer have the original features . at the town of béziers there is a staircase of eight locks at fonsérannes to bring it to the river orb . the locks had to be cut from solid rock , and descended a hillside whose gradient varied . all the locks had to contain the same volume of water , but could not have precisely the same shape . nonetheless , they were built successfully without a need for repair . this amazing piece of engineering was subcontracted out to two illiterate brothers , the medhailes , and was built by a workforce composed mainly of women . some of the locks on the canal are architectural gems . for instance , the agde round lock has three doors : two doors provide access to each side of the channel and the third provides access to the hérault going to the mediterranean . this system allows triple access while protecting the canal from river flooding . similarly , the canal has several multiple locks – i.e . with multiple locks attached to one another . this system saves doors and foundations in areas where the slope is greatest . the best known of these locks is fonserannes lock which has eight chambers . michel cotte , canal du midi , marvel of europe , paris : belin , 2003 , 191 pages , , p . 73-74 . today most of the locks are electrified which replaced the manual opening of the sluices and lock gates . the ports . several ports were built at regular intervals along the route of the canal in order to load and unload goods and also to provide stopping-places for travellers . toulouse has two ports : the port de l'embouchure is located at the junction of the canal du midi , the canal de brienne , and the canal de garonne while port saint-sauveur is located in the centre of town near the hall of grains . there were two other ports in toulouse but they were destroyed for urban development . so the port des minimes and the port saint-etienne were replaced by towpaths . castelnaudary has a port of 7 hectares called grand basin built between 1666 and 1671 . rené gast , the canal du midi and the navigable waterways from the atlantic to the mediterranean , rennes : ed . ouest-france , 2000 , 125 pages , , p . 47 . it served as a stopover halfway between toulouse and sète . cybelle island in the middle of the basin was used to protect the barges from the wind . carcassonne is today a major tourist stop on the canal and has a port built in 1810 at the time when the city was connected to the canal . the port of trèbes is a major port which has numerous moorings for boats . there are also the ports of homps which was one of the most important on the canal and le somail which was a popular place for rest and recreation . finally , just before its arrival at the mediterranean sea , the canal has two ports : the port of agde where there is the old hotel of the '' administration of the canal '' , and the port of onglous at marseillan which is the last port before sète and its royal canal giving access to the sea . newer ports were built such as ramonville-saint-agne , called port-sud , which has many residential barges and is set directly overlooking the harbour , and port-lauragais located near avignonet-lauragais on a service area of the a61 autoroute . the aqueducts . related article : aqueducts on the canal du midi several aqueducts an aqueduct is a 'canal bridge ' ( pont-canal in french ) carrying a canal over a river or valley , or any depression in the terrain . the same word in english is used for any overhead structure carrying water , while the french equivalent aqueduc refers to a water conveyance structure or ( as in the case of the canal du mid ) a siphon or culvert under the canal . this chapter refers only to the actual aqueducts carrying the canal itself , and not the secondary hydraulic structures . were built along the route of the canal du midi . they allow the canal to cross rivers that could disrupt the water flow in the canal . in fact , the rivers flowing into the canal cause an overflow of water during flooding and fill the canal with silt . some aqueducts date from the time of pierre-paul riquet , but most were built after the completion of the canal in particular due to improvements recommended by vauban . the canal has the following aqueducts ( in order from agde to toulouse ) : orb aqueduct ( pk 208 ) which was inaugurated in 1857 , eliminating the difficult crossing of the river orb cesse aqueduct ( pk 168 ) répudre aqueduct ( pk 159 ) was built between 1667 and 1676 to span the répudre near the village of paraza . the répudre is a small tributary of the aude in which the flow is too variable especially in winter ( bridge length : 135m ) . it was also the first aqueduct built by pierre-paul riquet orbiel aqueduct at trebes ( pk 117 ) fresquel aqueduct ( pk 109 ) was built beginning in 1800 and opened on 31 may 1810 , as a result of the realignment of the route to pass through the centre of the city of carcassonne , a city that refused to pay a share of the cost when the canal was first built herbettes aqueduct , ( pk 8 ) , a new aqueduct at toulouse completed in 1983 , 74m long , to cross a four-lane motorway . . other structures . pierre-paul riquet and the engineers who followed him over three centuries built many other structures on the canal du midi , of which the most important are listed here : the malpas tunnel 165m long southeast of the oppidum d'ensérune béziers , topographic map at 1/25000 scale , ign series , '' top 25 '' no . 2545et , 3rd edition , 2007 . which passes through a hill 50m above sea level and was a technical challenge for the time the argent-double spillway located in la redorte near the argent-double aqueduct : this work incorporates eleven successive stone arches contemporary to vauban , its designer ; it was built by antoine de niquet and allows for the overflow water from the canal to be discharged into the stream the fonserannes water slope , which bypasses the 6-lock staircase at fonserannes , was built at the time when the canal was to be upgraded to freycinet gauge to save time and allow larger vessels to work on . it has a unique machinery whose maintenance is expensive , but for several years , vnf has attempted to rehabilitate it to reduce waiting times at the fonséranes locks the ouvrages du libron ( the works of libron ) , a unique achievement of its kind which allows the canal to cross the course of the libron near agde the watermills of the canal du midi are located in derivation of the number of locks ( e.g . naurouze , gay , trèbes , matabiau , minimes , castelnaudary , castanet , beziers , etc . ) and used the water height differences to power quern-stones to grind grain from the commissioning of the canal . thereafter , they become real gristmills during the 18th century . thomas julien , the watermills of the canal du midi . of flour and flourmills , mémoire de maîtrise , université toulouse ii-le mirail , 2004 . . flora and fauna . the canal is a long ribbon of water stretching through the landscape and attracts many animal species . several species of fish such as bream breed in the canal , and others reproduce in its feeding rivers and spend part of their life in the canal . molluscs such as anodonta – a kind of freshwater mussel , and corbicula – a kind of freshwater clam occur in the canal . invasive coypu ( river rat or nutria ) and muskrats introduced from the americas burrow into the banks , which they damage . finally , many animals and birds come to drink water from the canal . the canal is also a very vegetated place . in the beginning , pierre-paul riquet planted trees to stabilize the banks of the canal especially where it overlooked the surrounding lands . the willow was widely used for its rapid growth . the engineer also planted irises on the side of the canal to reduce subsidence of its banks . in the 18th century , the trees planted along the canal become a source of income . so mulberries were planted for rearing silkworms . corinne labat , robert fuggetta , guy jungblut , marvin holdt , and gilles bernard , the canal du midi , from the 17th to the 21st centuries , portet-sur-garonne : empreinte , dl 2006 , 168 pages , , p . 4 . cites : archives of the canal du midi , voies navigables de france , liasses 673 , piece no . 6 . then , with the end of the silk culture in 1772 , the mulberry trees were replaced by the poplar from italy which was the most productive wood . structures and lock-keepers ' houses were decorated with fruit trees . at the revolution plantations around the canal had approximately 60,000 trees when there were only 45,000 at the beginning . corinne labat , robert fuggetta , guy jungblut , marvin holdt , and gilles bernard , the canal du midi , from the 17th to the 21st centuries , portet-sur-garonne : empreinte , dl 2006 , 168 pages , , p . 111 . it was under the first empire that platanus began to be planted to replace the cut trees , which are today the dominant variety along the canal . however , for several years , plane trees have been infected with canker stain , a disease caused by a microscopic fungus called ceratocystis platani . the first outbreaks were detected in 2006 with the number of infected plane trees reaching 83 in 2008 and 153 in 2009 . selective tree-felling campaigns have been conducted to try to stop the spread but with no effect . in addition , there is no effective treatment against the disease . in 2011 , 211 places and 1,338 diseased trees have been identified . vnf pursues the struggle against the disease , voies navigables de france ( sud-ouest ) website , 12 october 2011 . in 15 to 20 years all 42,000 plane trees of the canal du midi will have to be felled and replaced mainly by other species ( ash , lime ) , after initial experiments with a variety of plane-tree resisting the parasite . the sacrifice of plane trees on the canal du midi in lefigaro.fr , 27 july 2011 . epic beauty of tree-lined canal du midi under threat as fungus strikes , kim willsher , the guardian , 13 august 2011 . . the canal du midi as a model . the canal du midi was one of the great achievements of the late 17th century . riquet understood the hydraulic system of the montagne noire and had controlled it to serve the canal du midi . corinne labat , robert fuggetta , guy jungblut , marvin holdt , and gilles bernard , the canal du midi , from the 17th to the 21st centuries , portet-sur-garonne : empreinte , dl 2006 , 168 pages , , p . 47 . king louis xiv , who was the sponsor , also left it as a mark of his commitment to grandeur . the canal was also magnified by the encyclopédie by diderot and d'alembert in 1765 who highlighted its value and greatness . they compare it to roman constructions . another encyclopedia writer , jérôme lalande lauded the architectural and hydraulic achievement in his work the navigation canals and especially the canal de languedoc in 1778 . similarly , bernard forest de bélidor congratulated the designer in hydraulic architecture . the canal became an example in europe as throughout the age of enlightenment it was the only canal of this size in europe . michel cotte , canal du midi , marvel of europe , paris : belin , 2003 , 191 pages , , p . 88 . finally the american thomas jefferson , politician , architect , and future president of the united states , came to study the canal du midi in 1787 . as the united states ambassador to france he envisaged the construction of a similar work to link the potomac river to lake erie . people linked to the canal . pierre-paul riquet , designer of the canal du midi . he obtained from the king the ownership and operation of the canal du midi for life for himself and his descendants . he died in october 1680 shortly before its completion . jean-baptiste colbert , louis xiv 's controller-general of finances who was commissioned by the king to assess the cost and feasibility of the project . sebastien le prestre de vauban , the royal architect and engineer who made many improvements to the canal between 1685 and 1686 françois andreossy , a close associate and deputy of pierre-paul riquet who continued the work after the riquet 's death . louis nicolas de clerville an engineer who controlled and oversaw the works and advised riquet . see also . aqueducts on the canal du midi canal de garonne épanchoir de foucaud fonsérannes locks fonserannes water slope la nouvelle branch le somail locks on the canal du midi pont marengo , in carcassonne water features on the canal du midi . notes . comments . . citations . . references . michel adgé , the canal du midi - vol . 2 : three centuries of inland water shipping and travels , coll . '' canal du midi '' , ed . jean-denis bergasse , 1984 , arnaud d'antin de vaillac , understanding the canal du midi , éditions france empire , 1997 , bernard blancotte , the canal du midi , work of a titan , éditions lacour michel cotte , the canal du midi , marvel of europe , éditions belin , 2003 , rené gast , the canal du midi and the navigable waterways from the atlantic to the mediterranean , éditions ouest-france , 2000 , corinne labat , robert fuggetta , guy jungblut , marvin holdt , and gilles bernard , the canal du midi from the 17th to the 21st century , éditions empreinte , 2006 , . further reading . ( in english ) l.t.c . rolt , from sea to sea , 2nd edition , euromapping , 1994 , michel adgé , the canal du midi - vol . 1 : pierre-paul riquet and the canal du midi in arts and literature , coll . '' canal du midi '' , ed . jean-denis bergasse , 1984 michel adgé , the canal du midi - vol . 3 : centuries of human adventure , coll . '' canal du midi '' , ed . jean-denis bergasse , 1984 michel adgé , the canal du midi - vol . 4 : great moments and great sites . the canals of briare and lez-roissy , coll . '' canal du midi '' , ed . jean-denis bergasse , 1984 collective work of the association for promotion of archeology in midi-pyrénées , guide for the traveller to the canal du midi , réédition 1853 , jean broutin , the calm waters on the king 's canal , éditions belcastel , philippe calas , the canal du midi by bicycle , éditions edisud , philippe calas , memoire in images : the canal du midi , éditions alan sutton , philippe calas , all knowledge on the canal du midi , éditions grand sud , philippe calas , the canal du midi : archives and photograph of the most beautiful canal in the world , éditions grand sud , philippe calas , the canal du midi seen from the air , éditions sud ouest , gérard crouzy et philippe cucurou , supply system of the montagne noire , éditions bares , 1993 , clément debeir et sophie binder , canal du midi , privat , 2010 , pierre-paul riquet bonrepos ( baron de ) history of the canal of languedoc , impr . de crapelet , 1805 , 398 pages , oclc 38684880 louis destreme and alain félix , the canal du midi and the lateral canal of the garonne , éditions du chêne , 1996 jean-yves grégoire , on foot , on bicycle , the canal du midi and the lateral canal , rando-éditions , lionel hignard , françoise lemonnier , jean-claude pertuzé , julot on the canal du midi , toulouse , éditions loubatières andré maistre , the canal des deux-mers , the royal canal of languedoc 1666-1810 , éditions privat , 1979 , jacques morand , the canal du midi and pierre-paul riquet , éditions edisud , 1993 , hélène vérin , the glory of the engineers , the technical intelligence of the 16th to the 18th centuries , paris 1993 , 455 p . michel adgé , philippe delvit , robert marconis , jean-loup marfaing , samuel vanier , canal royal de languedoc : le partage des eaux , toulouse , éditions loubatières , 2009 , ( english ) claudine roland , claudine ( 1997 ) . the canal du midi ( english translation ed . ) . msm . external links . english : canal du midi and la nouvelle branch , with maps and details of places , ports and moorings , by the author of inland waterways of france , imray navigation details for 80 french rivers and canals ( french waterways website section ) aude pays cathare history and heritage website canal du midi map , photos & info canal du midi unesco property on google arts and culture french : old maps drawn by françois garipuy association of the canal du midi en languedoc history of the canal du midi a personal website in french canal-du-midi.org inter-regional directorate vnf ( south-west ) inter-communal tourism for the canal du midi website actions taken by vnf to save the heritage of trees of the canal canal du midi carcassonne intermunicipal tourist office of the canal du midi