Clarence Darrow

early life . clarence darrow was born in the small town of farmdale , ohio , on april 18 , 1857 , the fifth son of amirus and emily darrow ( née eddy ) , but grew up in nearby kinsman , ohio . both the darrow and eddy families had deep roots in colonial new england , and several of darrow 's ancestors served in the american revolution . darrow 's father was an ardent abolitionism and a proud iconoclast and religious freethinker . he was known throughout the town as the '' village infidel '' . emily darrow was an early supporter of female suffrage and a women 's rights advocate . the young clarence attended allegheny college and the university of michigan law school , but did not graduate from either institution . he attended allegheny college for only one year before the panic of 1873 struck , and darrow was determined not to be a financial burden to his father any longer . over the next three years he taught in the winter at the district school in a country community . while teaching , darrow started to reading law on his own , and by the end of his third year of teaching , his family urged him to enter the law department at ann arbor . darrow only studied there a year when he decided that it would be much more cost-effective to read law in an actual law office . when he felt that he was ready , he took the ohio bar exam and passed . he was admitted to the ohio bar in 1878 . the clarence darrow octagon house , his childhood home in kinsman , contains a memorial to him . marriages and child . darrow married jessie ohl in april 1880 . they had one child , paul edward darrow , in 1883 . they were divorced in 1897 . darrow later married ruby hammerstrom , a journalist 16 years his junior , in 1903 . they had no children . . legal career . darrow opened his first law office in andover , ohio , a small farming town just ten miles from kinsman . having little to no experience , he started off slowly and gradually built up his career by dealing with the everyday complaints and problems of a farming community . after two years darrow felt he was ready to take on new and different cases and moved his practice to ashtabula , ohio , which had a population of 5,000 people and was the largest city in the county . there he became involved in democratic party politics and served as the town counsel . in 1880 , he married jessie ohl , and eight years later he moved to chicago with his wife and young son , paul . he did not have much business when he first moved to chicago , and spent as little as possible . he joined the henry george club and made some friends and connections in the city . being part of the club also gave him an opportunity to speak for the democratic party on the upcoming election . he slowly made a name for himself through these speeches , eventually earning the standing to speak in whatever hall he liked . he was offered work as an attorney for the city of chicago . darrow worked in the city law department for two years when he resigned and took a position as a lawyer at the chicago and north-western railway company . in 1894 , darrow represented eugene v . debs , the leader of the american railway union , who was prosecuted by the federal government for leading the pullman strike of 1894 . darrow severed his ties with the railroad to represent debs , making a financial sacrifice . he saved debs in one trial but could not keep him from being jailed in another . also in 1894 , darrow took on the first murder case of his career , defending patrick eugene prendergast , the '' mentally deranged drifter '' who had confessed to murdering chicago mayor carter harrison , sr . clarence darrow : biography and much more from answers.com at www.answers.com darrow 's '' insanity defense '' failed and prendergast was executed that same year . among fifty defenses in murder cases throughout the whole of darrow 's career , the prendergast case would prove to be the only one resulting in an execution , though darrow did not join the defense team until after prendergast 's conviction and sentence , in an effort to spare him the noose . . from corporate lawyer to labor lawyer . darrow soon became one of america 's leading labor attorneys . he helped organize the populist party in illinois and then ran for u.s . congress as a democrat in 1895 but lost to hugh r . belknap . in 1897 , his marriage to jessie ohl ended in divorce . he joined the anti-imperialist league in 1898 in opposition to the u.s . annexation of the philippines . he represented the woodworkers of wisconsin in a notable case in oshkosh in 1898 and the united mine workers in pennsylvania in the coal strike of 1902 . he flirted with the idea of running for mayor of chicago in 1903 but ultimately decided against it . the following year , in july , darrow married ruby hammerstrom , a young chicago journalist . passport application , accessed through familysearch.org his former mentor , governor john peter altgeld , joined darrow 's firm following his chicago mayoral electoral defeat in 1899 and worked with darrow until his death in 1902 . from 1906 to 1908 , darrow represented the western federation of miners leaders william '' big bill '' haywood , charles moyer , and george pettibone when they were arrested and charged with conspiring to murder former idaho governor frank steunenberg in 1905 . haywood and pettibone were found not guilty in separate trials , and the charges against moyer were then dropped . in 1911 , the american federation of labor ( afl ) called on darrow to defend the mcnamara brothers , john and james , who were charged in the los angeles times bombing on october 1 , 1910 , during the bitter struggle over the open shop in southern california . the bomb had been placed in an alley behind the building , and although the explosion itself did not bring the building down , it ignited nearby ink barrels and natural gas main lines . in the ensuing fire , 20 people were killed . the afl appealed to local , state , regional and national unions to donate 25 cents per capita to the defense fund , and set up defense committees in larger cities throughout the nation to accept donations . in the weeks before the jury was seated , darrow became increasingly concerned about the outcome of the trial and began negotiations for a plea bargain to spare the defendants ' lives . during the weekend of november 19–20 , 1911 , he discussed with pro-labor journalist lincoln steffens and newspaper publisher e.w . scripps the possibility of reaching out to the times about the terms of a plea agreement . the prosecution had demands of its own , however , including an admission of guilt in open court and longer sentences than the defense proposed . darrow , clarence . the story of my life , 1932 . project guttenberg . foner , phillip s . history of the labor movement in the united states : the afl in the progressive era , 1910–1915 , 1980 . the defense 's position weakened when , on november 28 , darrow was accused of orchestrating to bribe a prospective juror . the juror reported the offer to police , who set up a sting and observed the defense team 's chief investigator , bert franklin , delivering 4,000 to the juror two blocks away from darrow 's office . after making payment , franklin walked one block in the direction of darrow 's office before being arrested right in front of darrow himself , who had just walked to that very intersection after receiving a phone call in his office . with darrow himself on the verge of being discredited , the defense 's hope for a simple plea agreement ended . farrell , john a . '' darrow in the dock '' . smithsonian magazine , december 2011 , volume 42 , number 8 , pp . 98–111 . cowan , the people v . clarence darrow : the bribery trial of america 's greatest lawyer , 1994 on december 1 , 1911 , the mcnamara brothers changed their pleas to guilty , in open court . the plea bargain darrow helped arrange earned john fifteen years and james life imprisonment . despite sparing the brothers the death penalty , darrow was accused by many in organized labor of selling the movement out . two months later , darrow was charged with two counts of attempting to bribe jurors in both cases . he faced two lengthy trials . in the first , defended by earl rogers , he was acquitted . rogers became ill during the second trial and rarely came to court . darrow served as his own attorney for the remainder of the trial , which ended with a hung jury . a deal was struck in which the district attorney agreed not to retry darrow if he promised not to practice law again in california . see in '' clarence darrow : a sentimental rebel '' by arthur and lila weinberg . darrow 's early biographers , irving stone and arthur and lila weinberg , asserted that he was not involved in the bribery conspiracy , but more recently , geoffrey cowan and john a . farrell , with the help of new evidence , concluded that he almost certainly was . in the biography of earl rogers by his daughter adela , she wrote : '' i never had any doubts , even before one of my father 's private conversations with darrow included an admission of guilt to his lawyer . '' adela rogers st . johns : final verdict , ( doubleday , 1962 ) 457 . . from labor lawyer to criminal lawyer . as a consequence of the bribery charges , most labor unions dropped darrow from their list of preferred attorneys . this effectively put darrow out of business as a labor lawyer , and he switched to civil and criminal cases . he took the latter because he had become convinced that the criminal justice system could ruin people 's lives if they were not adequately represented . throughout his career , darrow devoted himself to opposing the death penalty , which he felt to be in conflict with humanitarian progress . in more than 100 cases , only one of darrow 's clients was executed . he became renowned for moving juries and even judges to tears with his eloquence . darrow had a keen intellect often hidden by his rumpled , unassuming appearance . a july 23 , 1915 , article in the chicago tribune describes darrow 's effort on behalf of j.h . fox , an evanston , illinois , landlord , to have mary s . brazelton committed to an insane asylum against the wishes of her family . fox alleged that brazelton owed him rent money , although other residents of fox 's boarding house testified to her sanity . national renown . . leopold and loeb . in the summer of 1924 , darrow took on the case of leopold and loeb , the teenage sons of two wealthy chicago families who were accused of kidnapping and killing bobby franks , a 14-year-old boy , from their stylish southside kenwood neighborhood . leopold was a law student at the university of chicago about to transfer to harvard law school , and loeb was the youngest graduate ever from the university of michigan ; they were 18 and 17 , respectively , when they were arrested . when asked why they committed the crime , leopold told his captors : '' the thing that prompted dick to want to do this thing and prompted me to want to do this thing was a sort of pure love of excitement . the imaginary love of thrills , doing something different . the satisfaction and the ego of putting something over . '' chicago newspapers labeled the case the '' trial of the century '' jurist – the trial of leopold and loeb , prof . douglas linder . retrieved november 2 , 2010 . and americans around the country wondered what could drive the two young men , blessed with everything their society could offer , to commit such a depraved act . the killers had been arrested after a passing workman spotted the victim 's body in an isolated nature preserve near the indiana border just half a day after it was hidden , before they could collect a 10,000 ransom . nearby were leopold 's eyeglasses with their distinctive , traceable frames , which he had dropped at the scene . leopold and loeb made full confessions and took police on a hunt around chicago to collect the evidence that would be used against them . the state 's attorney told the press that he had a '' hanging case '' for sure . darrow stunned the prosecution when he had his clients plead guilty in order to avoid a vengeance-minded jury and place the case before a judge . the trial , then , was actually a long sentencing hearing in which darrow contended , with the help of expert testimony , that leopold and loeb were mentally diseased . darrow 's closing argument lasted 12 hours . he repeatedly stressed the ages of the '' boys '' ( before the vietnam war , the age of majority was 21 ) and noted that '' never had there been a case in chicago where on a plea of guilty a boy under 21 had been sentenced to death . '' his plea was designed to soften the heart of judge john caverly , but also to mold public opinion , so that caverly could follow precedent without too huge an uproar . darrow succeeded . caverly sentenced leopold and loeb to life in prison plus 99 years . darrow 's closing argument was published in several editions in the late 1920s and early 1930s , and was reissued at the time of his death . the leopold and loeb case raised , in a well-publicized trial , darrow 's lifelong contention that psychological , physical , and environmental influences—not a conscious choice between right and wrong—control human behavior . darrow 's psychiatric expert witnesses testified that both boys '' were decidedly deficient in emotion '' . darrow later argued that emotion is necessary for the decisions that people make . when someone tries to go against a certain law or custom that is forbidden , he wrote , he should feel a sense of revulsion . as neither leopold nor loeb had a working emotional system , they did not feel revolted . during the trial , the newspapers claimed that darrow was presenting a '' million dollar defense '' for the two wealthy families . many ordinary americans were angered at his apparent greed . he had the families issue a statement insisting that there would be no large legal fees and that his fees would be determined by a committee composed of officers from the chicago bar association . after trial , darrow suggested 200,000 would be reasonable . after lengthy negotiations with the defendants ' families , he ended up getting some 70,000 in gross fees , which , after expenses and taxes , netted darrow 30,000 , worth over 375,000 in 2016 . see , a . weinberg , ed . , attorney for the damned , pp . 17–18 , n . 1 ( simon & schuster , 1957 ) ) ; hulbert papers , northwestern university . . scopes trial . in 1925 , darrow defended john t . scopes in the scopes trial trial . it has often been called the '' scopes monkey trial , '' a title popularized by author and journalist h.l . mencken . the trial , which was deliberately staged to bring publicity to the issue at hand , pitted darrow against william jennings bryan in a court case that tested tennessee 's butler act , which had been passed on march 21 , 1925 . the act forbade the teaching of '' the evolution '' in any state-funded educational establishment . more broadly , it outlawed in state-funded schools ( including universities ) the teaching of '' any theory that denies the story of the creationism of man as taught in the bible , and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals . '' during the trial , darrow requested that bryan be called to the stand as an expert witness on the bible . over the other prosecutor 's objection , bryan agreed . popular media at the time portrayed the following exchange as the deciding factor that turned public opinion against bryan in the trial : : darrow : '' you have given considerable study to the bible , have n't you , mr . bryan ? '' : bryan : '' yes , sir ; i have tried to . but , of course , i have studied it more as i have become older than when i was a boy . '' : darrow : '' do you claim then that everything in the bible should be literally interpreted ? '' : bryan : '' i believe that everything in the bible should be accepted as it is given there ; some of the bible is given illustratively . for instance : 'ye are the salt of the earth . ' i would not insist that man was actually salt , or that he had flesh of salt , but it is used in the sense of salt as saving god 's people . '' after about two hours , judge john t . raulston cut the questioning short and on the following morning ordered that the whole session ( which in any case the jury had not witnessed ) be expunged from the record , ruling that the testimony had no bearing on whether scopes was guilty of teaching evolution . scopes was found guilty and ordered to pay the minimum fine of 100 . a year later , the tennessee supreme court reversed the decision of the dayton court on a procedural technicality—not on constitutional grounds , as darrow had hoped . according to the court , the fine should have been set by the jury , not raulston . rather than send the case back for further action , however , the tennessee supreme court dismissed the case . the court commented , '' nothing is to be gained by prolonging the life of this bizarre case . '' the event led to a change in public sentiment and an increased discourse on the creation claims of religious teachers versus those of secular scientists i.e . , creationism compared to evolutionism that still exists . it also became popularized in a play based loosely on the trial , inherit the wind , which has been adapted several times on film and television . ossian sweet . on september 9 , 1925 , a white mob in detroit attempted to drive a black family out of the home they had purchased in a white neighborhood . during the struggle , a white man was killed , and the eleven black men in the house were later arrested and charged with murder . ossian sweet , a doctor , and three members of his family were brought to trial , and after an initial deadlock , darrow argued to the all-white jury : '' i insist that there is nothing but prejudice in this case ; that if it was reversed and eleven white men had shot and killed a black man while protecting their home and their lives against a mob of blacks , nobody would have dreamed of having them indicted . they would have been given medals instead . '' following a mistrial , it was agreed that each of the eleven defendants would be tried individually . darrow , alongside thomas chawke , would first defend ossian 's brother henry , who had confessed to firing the shot on garland street . henry was found not guilty on grounds of self-defense , and the prosecution determined to drop the charges on the remaining ten . the trials were presided over by frank murphy , who went on to become governor of michigan and an associate justice of the supreme court of the united states . boyle , kevin , arc of justice : a saga of race , civil rights and murder in the jazz age ( henry holt & company , new york : 2004 ) ( national book award winner ) . darrow 's closing statement , which lasted over seven hours , is seen as a landmark in the civil rights movement and was included in the book speeches that changed the world ( given the name '' i believe in the law of love '' ) . the two closing arguments of clarence darrow , from the first and second trials , show how he learned from the first trial and reshaped his remarks . . massie trial . the scopes trial and the sweet trial were the last big cases that darrow took on before he retired from full-time practice at the age of 68 . he still took on a few cases such as the 1932 massie trial in hawaii . in his last headline-making case , the massie trial , darrow , devastated by the great depression , was hired by eva stotesbury , the wife of darrow 's old family friend edward t . stotesbury , to come to the defense of grace fortescue , edward j . lord , deacon jones , and thomas massie , fortescue 's son-in-law , who were accused of murdering joseph kahahawai . kahahawai had been accused , along with four other men , of raping and beating thalia massie , thomas 's wife and fortescue 's daughter ; the resulting 1931 case ended in a hung jury ( though the charges were later dropped and repeated investigation has shown them to be innocent ) . enraged , fortescue and massie then orchestrated the murder of kahahawai in order to extract a confession and were caught by police officers while transporting his dead body . darrow entered the racially charged atmosphere as the lawyer for the defendants . darrow reconstructed the case as a justified honor killing by thomas massie . considered by the new york times to be one of darrow 's three most compelling trials ( along with the scopes trial and the leopold and loeb case ) , the case captivated the nation and most of white america strongly supported the honor killing defense . in fact , the final defense arguments were transmitted to the mainland through a special radio hookup . in the end , the jury came back with a unanimous verdict of guilty , but on the lesser crime of manslaughter . david stannard . '' the massie case : injustice and courage '' . the honolulu advertiser , october 14 , 2001 . as to darrow 's closing , one juror commented , '' he talked to us like a bunch of farmers . that stuff may go over big in the middle west , but not here . '' governor lawrence judd later commuted the sentences to one hour in his office . page 86 years later deacon admitted to shooting kahahawai ; massie was found '' not guilty '' in a posthumous trial . religious beliefs . '' why i am an agnostic '' . as part of a public symposium on belief held in columbus , ohio in 1929 , darrow delivered a speech , later titled '' why i am an agnostic '' , on agnosticism , skepticism , belief , and religion . in the speech , darrow thoroughly discussed the meaning of being an agnostic and questioned the doctrines of christianity and the bible . he concluded that '' the fear of god is not the beginning of wisdom . the fear of god is the death of wisdom . skepticism and doubt lead to study and investigation , and investigation is the beginning of wisdom . '' . mecca temple debate . in january 1931 darrow had a debate with english writer g . k . chesterton during the latter 's second trip to america . this was held at new york city 's mecca temple . the topic was '' will the world return to religion ? '' . at the end of the debate those in the hall were asked to vote for the man they thought had won the debate . darrow received 1,022 votes while chesterton received 2,359 votes . there is no known transcript of what was said except for third party accounts published later on . the earliest of these was that of february 4 , 1931 , issue of the nation with an article written by henry hazlitt . . position on eugenics . in the edition of november 18 , 1915 of the washington post , darrow stated : '' chloroform unfit children . show them the same mercy that is shown beasts that are no longer fit to live . '' however , darrow was also critical of some eugenics advocates . by the 1920s , the eugenics movement was very powerful and darrow was a pointed critic of that movement . in the years immediately before the supreme court of the united states would endorse eugenics through buck v . bell , darrow wrote multiple essays criticizing the illogic of the eugenicists , especially the confirmation bias in eugenicist arguments . see darrow , clarence , “ the edwardses and the jukeses . ” american mercury . vol . 6 , october 1925 , 147-57 . in a 1925 essay , '' the edwardses and the jukeses '' , he imitated the eugenicists ' tracking of pedigrees as a way to demonstrate that their retrospective centuries-long family tree studies were omitting literally thousands of relatives whose lives did not support the researchers ' preconceptions . eugenicist arguments about the eminent edwards family ( of the theologian jonathan edwards ) ignored that family 's mediocre relatives , and even ignored some immediately related murderers . eugenicist arguments about the jukes family did just the opposite , leaving ignored or untraced many functional and law-abiding relatives . see darrow , clarence , '' the edwardses and the jukeses '' . american mercury . vol . 6 , october 1925 , 147-57 . in darrow 's subsequent essay , '' the eugenics cult '' ( 1926 ) , he attacked the reasoning of eugenicists . see darrow , clarence , '' the eugenics cult . '' american mercury . vol . 8 , june 1926 , 129-37 . '' on the basis of what biological principles , and by what psychological hocus-pocus dr . william mcdougall reaches the conclusion that the ability to read intelligently denotes a good germ-plasm and desirable citizens i can not say , '' he wrote . darrow , clarence , “ the eugenics cult . ” american mercury . vol . 8 , june 1926 , 129-37 . darrow also criticized the idea that humanity even knows what qualities it would take to make humanity '' better , '' and compared humanity 's biology experiments unfavorably to those of nature . see darrow , clarence , '' the eugenics cult '' . american mercury . vol . 8 , june 1926 , 129-37 . . political career . darrow was well-involved in chicago democratic machine . in the 1903 chicago mayoral election there was a strong push by members of the chicago federation of labor and others to draft darrow as a third-party candidate . darrow considered accepting , and even seemed prepared to announce his candidacy , but ultimately declined to run . darrow served in the illinois house of representatives in 1903 and 1904 and was an independent . he was elected to the illinois general assembly on a platform '' advocating the municipal ownership of public utilities . '' 'illinois blue book 1903-1904 , ' biographical sketch of clarence s . darrow , pg . 367 our campaigns.com.-clarence seward darrow darrow was appointed in 1905 by newly elected chicago mayor edward fitzsimmons dunne to serve in the position of '' special traction counsel to the mayor '' , assisting dunne in his attempts to resolve the city 's traction problem . justice and humanity : edward f . dunne , illinois progressive . p . & nbsp ; 14-17 . carbondale , ill . : southern illinois university press , 1997 . he and dunne had presented two plans to the chicago city council , both of which it rejected . darrow resigned his position in november 1905 . . death . darrow died on march 13 , 1938 , at his home , in chicago , illinois , of pulmonary heart disease . james edward sayer , '' clarence darrow : public advocate '' , wright state univ . ( 1978 ) , p 2 . . legacy . today , clarence darrow is remembered for his reputation as a fierce litigator who , in many cases , championed the cause of the underdog ; because of this , he is generally regarded as one of the greatest criminal defense lawyers in american history . image : inherit the wind trailer ( 3 ) spencer tracy.jpg thumb 250px henry drummond ( left ) , a fictionalized version of clarence darrow , as portrayed by spencer tracy in inherit the wind . according to legend , before he died , darrow declared that if there was an afterlife , he would return on the small bridge ( now known as the clarence darrow memorial bridge ) located just south of the museum of science and industry in hyde park , chicago on the date of his death . darrow was skeptical of a belief in life after death ( he is reported to have said : '' every man knows when his life began . if i did not exist in the past , why should i , or could i , exist in the future ? '' ) but he made this promise to dissuade mediums from charging people money to '' talk '' to his spirit . people still gather on the bridge in the hopes of seeing his ghost . . plays . darrow , a full-length one-man play created after his death , featuring darrow 's reminiscences about his career . originated by henry fonda , many actors ( including leslie nielsen and david canary ) have since taken on the role of darrow in this play , which was adapted as darrow , a film starring kevin spacey and released by american playhouse in 1991 . inherit the wind , a play ( later adapted to the screen ) which is a broadly fictionalized account of the scopes trial . though the authors note that the 1925 trial was '' clearly the genesis '' of their play , they insist that the characters had '' life and language of their own . '' they also mention that the issues raised in the play '' have acquired new dimension and meaning '' , a possible reference to the political controversies of the 1950s . still , they finish their foreword by inviting a more universal reading of the play : '' it might have been yesterday . it could be tomorrow . '' jerome lawrence and robert e . lee . inherit the wind . bantam , 1955 . spencer tracy played the darrow character ( '' henry drummond '' ) in the film , and jason robards plays him in a tv remake in 1988 . malice aforethought : the sweet trials is a play written by arthur beer , based on the trials of ossian and henry sweet , and derived from kevin boyle 's arc of justice . my name is ossian sweet , a docudrama written by gordon c . bennett , based on the sweet trials in which the black family was defended by darrow against a charge of murder in detroit 1925 . published ( 2011 ) at heartlandplays.com . clarence darrow by david w . rintels , where kevin spacey again portrayed darrow in this one-man performance in 2014 and 2015 . clarence darrow tonight ! written and performed by laurence luckinbill , debuted at the ensemble theater in nyc and performed throughout the country , including at president bill clinton 's second inaugural in 1996 . winner of the 1996 silver gavel award for theater , given by the american bar association . during a police interrogation at the police station in the 1949 movie holiday affair , the character , connie ennis ( janet leigh ) said to the lieutenant ( harry morgan ) , '' your honor , i think i can clear this all up . '' the lieutenant said , '' go ahead , if clarence darrow here does n't have any objections . '' he was referring to her fiancé in the movie carl davis , played by wendell corey . film and television . compulsion , 1959 film . fictionalized account of the leopold and loeb trial . orson welles played the role of the defense attorney , based on darrow . alleged , starring brian dennehy and fred thompson the episode , '' defendant : clarence darrow '' ( january 13 , 1963 ) , with tol avery playing darrow , in the cbs anthology series , ge true , hosted by jack webb . in the storyline , darrow is charged in 1912 with attempted bribery of a juror . he is defended by earl rogers , played by robert vaughn . darrow and rogers argue passionately over legal procedures . . publications . . non-fiction . '' attorney for the damned '' ( arthur weinberg , ed ) , published by university of chicago press in 2012 ; simon and schuster in 1957 ; provides darrow 's most influential summations and includes scene-setting explanations and comprehensive notes ; on nyt best seller list 19 weeks . clarence darrow : attorney for the damned by john a . farrell , published by doubleday in june 2011 ; includes new material opened to the public in june 2010 by the university of minnesota law library through the clarence darrow digital collection arc of justice ( owl books , 2004 ) by kevin boyle ; in-depth look at the ossian sweet trial clarence darrow for the defense , a biography by historical novelist irving stone the people v . clarence darrow by geoffrey cowan ; the history of the california criminal case against darrow for attempting to bribe a juror while defending the mcnamara brothers , two labor organizers accused of planting a bomb which destroyed the printing plant of the los angeles times and killed 21 workers . '' is religion necessary '' ( haldeman-julius publications ) ; a transcript of the debate between clarence darrow and rev . robert macgovern , 1931 . fiction . compulsion , a 1956 novel by meyer levin , is a dramatic retelling of the leopold and loeb case in which darrow served as the basis for the character of jonathan wilk . the novel was adapted as a film of the same name in 1959 starring orson welles as wilk . welles , whose plea to the judge for mercy for his clients was the longest monologue ever committed to film at the time , shared the best actor award with co-stars bradford dillman and dean stockwell at that year 's cannes film festival . damned in paradise , a 1996 nate heller novel by max allan collins , renders a fictionalized account of the massie trial . the angel of darkness , a 1997 novel by caleb carr , features darrow in a supporting role . other . the clarence darrow memorial bridge is located in chicago , just south of the museum of science & industry . the clarence darrow commemorative committee holds an annual event to honor darrow 's life and work . the complete collection of clarence darrow 's personal papers is housed at the university of minnesota libraries . darrow is mentioned in '' the gift '' , a 1967 song by lou reed as performed by the velvet underground on their 1968 album white light/white heat . the chapter of phi alpha delta located at the university of maryland school of law is named the clarence darrow chapter . a statue of darrow stands outside the rhea county courthouse in dayton , tennessee , site of the 1925 scopes trial . the statue was erected on july 14 , 2017 , and stands just a few feet away from a statue of darrow 's scopes trial opponent , william jennings bryan , erected in 2005 . darrow was reported to have distracted juries during the closing arguments of his opponents with a cigar trick . he allegedly inserted a thin piano wire into his cigar , which he lit up in the courtroom , to prevent the cigar ash from falling . the jury was reportedly distracted by the fact that the ashes , held together by the wire , never fell from darrow 's cigar . . books by darrow . a volume of darrow 's boyhood reminiscences , entitled farmington , was published in chicago in 1903 by mcclurg and company . darrow shared offices with edgar lee masters , who achieved more fame for his poetry , in particular , the spoon river anthology , than for his advocacy . the papers of clarence darrow are located at the library of congress and the university of minnesota libraries . the riesenfeld rare books research center of the university of minnesota law school has the largest collection of clarence darrow material including personal letters to and from darrow . many of these letters and other material are available on the u of m 's clarence darrow digital collection website . list of books . an eye for an eye crime : its cause and treatment persian pearl the story of my life farmington resist not evil marx vs tolstoy closing arguments on religion , law and society the myth of the soul . references and further reading . baatz , simon . for the thrill of it : leopold , loeb and the murder that shocked chicago ( new york : harpercollins , 2008 ) blum , howard . american lightning : terror , mystery , the birth of hollywood , and the crime of the century , 2008 , crown . boyle , kevin . arc of justice : a saga of race , civil rights and murder in the jazz age ( new york : henry holt & co . , 2004 ) . ( national book award winner ) . farrell , john aloysius . '' clarence darrow : attorney for the damned '' . doubleday , new york : 2011 . marcet haldeman-julius . clarence darrow 's two great trials : reports of the scopes anti-evolution case and the dr . sweet negro trial . girard : haldeman-julius co . , 1927 . haldeman-julius was an eye-witness to the trials . excerpt regarding the scopes trial here , regarding the sweet trials here and here . mackey , judge alfred w . clarence darrow biography mcrae , donald . the last trials of clarence darrow ( new york : william morrow publishers , 2009 ) . morton , richard allen . '' a victorian tragedy : the strange deaths of mayor carter h . harrison and patrick eugene pendergast , '' journal of the illinois state historical society , spring 2003 ( here ) . ossian sweet murder trial scrapbook , 1925 . scrapbook and photocopy of the nov . 1925 murder trial of ossian sweet . clarke historical library , central michigan university . weinberg , arthur ( ed . ) . attorney for the damned : clarence darrow in the courtroom . '' ( university of chicago press , 1989 ) . weinberg , arthur & lila . '' clarence darrow : a sentimental rebel '' atheneum ; 1st atheneum pbk . ed edition ( march 1987 ) adela rogers st . johns : final verdict ( doubleday , 1962 ; biography of earl rogers , relating the events of darrow 's trials for jury bribery ) stone , irving . clarence darrow for the defense ( garden city : doubleday , doran & co . , 1941 ) . toms , robert . '' speech on the sweet murder trials upon retirement of the prosecuting attorney in 1960 . '' clarke historical library , central michigan university . vine , phyllis . one man 's castle : clarence darrow in defense of the american dream . ( new york : amistad , 2005 ) . primary sources . chicago history museum : darrow bibliography ( online here ) . darrow , clarence . the story of my life . new york : scribner , 1932 . darrow , clarence . in the clutches of the law : clarence darrow 's letters ( ed . randall tietjen ) . berkeley : ucp , 2013 . montefiore , simon ( introd . ) . speeches that changed the world ( rev . ed . ) . london : quercus , 2014 . university of minnesota law school , the clarence darrow digital collection . ( 2016 ) university of minnesota law school , the clarence darrow digital collection . ( 2019 ) . references . external links . an excerpt on the mcnamara case from '' clarence darrow : attorney for the damned . '' ossian haven sweet american national biography . darrow family scrapbooks at the newberry library mary field parton-clarence darrow papers at the newberry library john t . jacobs-clarence darrow papers at the newberry library trial of the century closing argument guide to the clarence darrow papers 1913-1944 at the university of chicago special collections research center