Front-side bus

history . the term came into use by intel corporation about the time the pentium pro and pentium ii products were announced , in the 1990s . '' front side '' refers to the external interface from the processor to the rest of the computer system , as opposed to the back side , where the back-side bus connects the cache ( and potentially other cpus ) . a front-side bus ( fsb ) is mostly used on pc-related motherboards ( including personal computers and servers ) . they are seldom used in embedded systems or similar small computers . the fsb design was a performance improvement over the single system bus designs of the previous decades , but these front-side buses are sometimes referred to as the '' system bus . '' front-side buses usually connect the cpu and the rest of the hardware via a chipset , which intel implemented as a northbridge and a southbridge . other buses like the peripheral component interconnect ( pci ) , accelerated graphics port ( agp ) , and memory buses all connect to the chipset in order for data to flow between the connected devices . these secondary system buses usually run at speeds derived from the front-side bus clock , but are not necessarily synchronized to it . in response to amd 's torrenza initiative , intel opened its fsb cpu socket to third party devices . prior to this announcement , made in spring 2007 at intel developer forum in beijing , intel had very closely guarded who had access to the fsb , only allowing intel processors in the cpu socket . the first example was field-programmable gate array ( fpga ) co-processors , a result of collaboration between intel-xilinx-nallatech and intel-altera-xtremedata ( which shipped in 2008 ) . . related component speeds . cpu . the frequency at which a processor ( cpu ) operates is determined by applying a clock multiplier to the front-side bus ( fsb ) speed in some cases . for example , a processor running at 3200 mhz might be using a 400 & nbsp ; mhz fsb . this means there is an internal cpu multiplier setting ( also called bus/core ratio ) of 8 . that is , the cpu is set to run at 8 times the frequency of the front-side bus : 400 & nbsp ; mhz & times ; 8 3200 & nbsp ; mhz . different cpu speeds are achieved by varying either the fsb frequency or the cpu multiplier , this is referred to as overclocking or underclocking . memory . setting an fsb speed is related directly to the speed grade of memory a system must use . the memory bus connects the northbridge and ram , just as the front-side bus connects the cpu and northbridge . often , these two buses must operate at the same frequency . increasing the front-side bus to 450 & nbsp ; mhz in most cases also means running the memory at 450 & nbsp ; mhz . in newer systems , it is possible to see memory ratios of '' 4:5 '' and the like . the memory will run 5/4 times as fast as the fsb in this situation , meaning a 400 & nbsp ; mhz bus can run with the memory at 500 & nbsp ; mhz . this is often referred to as an 'asynchronous ' system . due to differences in cpu and system architecture , overall system performance can vary in unexpected ways with different fsb-to-memory ratios . in image , audio , video , gaming , fpga synthesis and scientific applications that perform a small amount of work on each element of a large data set , fsb speed becomes a major performance issue . a slow fsb will cause the cpu to spend significant amounts of time waiting for data to arrive from system memory . however , if the computations involving each element are more complex , the processor will spend longer performing these ; therefore , the fsb will be able to keep pace because the rate at which the memory is accessed is reduced . peripheral buses . similar to the memory bus , the pci and agp buses can also be run asynchronously from the front-side bus . in older systems , these buses are operated at a set fraction of the front-side bus frequency . this fraction was set by the bios . in newer systems , the pci , agp , and pci express peripheral buses often receive their own clock signals , which eliminates their dependence on the front-side bus for timing . overclocking . overclocking is the practice of making computer components operate beyond their stock performance levels by manipulating the frequencies at which the component is set to run , and , when necessary , modifying the voltage sent to the component to allow it to operate at these higher frequencies more stably . many motherboards allow the user to manually set the clock multiplier and fsb settings by changing jumpers or bios settings . almost all cpu manufacturers now '' lock '' a preset multiplier setting into the chip . it is possible to unlock some locked cpus ; for instance , some amd athlon processors can be unlocked by connecting electrical contacts across points on the cpu 's surface . some other processors from amd and intel are unlocked from the factory and labeled as an '' enthusiast-grade '' processors by end users and retailers because of this feature . for all processors , increasing the fsb speed can be done to boost processing speed by reducing latency between cpu and the northbridge . this practice pushes components beyond their specifications and may cause erratic behavior , overheating or premature failure . even if the computer appears to run normally , problems may appear under a heavy load . most pcs purchased from retailers or manufacturers , such as hewlett-packard or dell , do not allow the user to change the multiplier or fsb settings due to the probability of erratic behavior or failure . motherboards purchased separately to build a custom machine are more likely to allow the user to edit the multiplier and fsb settings in the pc 's bios . evolution . the front-side bus had the advantage of high flexibility and low cost when it was first designed . simple symmetric multiprocessors place a number of cpus on a shared fsb , though performance could not scale linearly due to bandwidth bottlenecks . the front-side bus was used in all intel atom , celeron , pentium , core 2 , and xeon processor models through about 2008 . originally , this bus was a central connecting point for all system devices and the cpu . the potential of a faster cpu is wasted if it can not fetch instructions and data as quickly as it can execute them . the cpu may spend significant time idle while waiting to read or write data in main memory , and high-performance processors therefore require high bandwidth and low latency access to memory . the front-side bus was criticized by amd as being an old and slow technology that limits system performance . more modern designs use point-to-point connections like amd 's hypertransport and intel 's dmi 2.0 or quickpath interconnect ( qpi ) . these implementations remove the traditional northbridge in favor of a direct link from the cpu to the platform controller hub , southbridge or i/o controller . in a traditional architecture , the front-side bus served as the immediate data link between the cpu and all other devices in the system , including main memory . in hypertransport- and qpi-based systems , system memory is accessed independently by means of a memory controller integrated into the cpu , leaving the bandwidth on the hypertransport or qpi link for other uses . this increases the complexity of the cpu design but offers greater throughput as well as superior scaling in multiprocessor systems . transfer rates . the bandwidth or maximum theoretical throughput of the front-side bus is determined by the product of the width of its data path , its clock rate ( cycles per second ) and the number of data transfers it performs per clock cycle . for example , a 64-bit ( 8-byte ) wide fsb operating at a frequency of 100 & nbsp ; mhz that performs 4 transfers per cycle has a bandwidth of 3200 megabytes per second ( mb/s ) : :8 bytes/transfer & times ; 100 mhz & times ; 4 transfers/cycle 3200 mb/s the number of transfers per clock cycle depends on the technology used . for example , gtl+ performs 1 transfer/cycle , ev6 2 transfers/cycle , and agtl+ 4 transfers/cycle . intel calls the technique of four transfers per cycle quad pumping . many manufacturers publish the frequency of the front-side bus in mhz , but marketing materials often list the theoretical effective signaling rate ( which is commonly called megatransfers per second or mt/s ) . for example , if a motherboard ( or processor ) has its bus set at 200 & nbsp ; mhz and performs 4 transfers per clock cycle , the fsb is rated at 800 mt/s . the specifications of several generations of popular processors are indicated below . intel processors . . references .