Oxford Canal

the route . the canal begins in warwickshire near hawkesbury village at hawkesbury junction , also known as sutton stop , where it connects with the coventry canal , a little over 4 miles ( or about 7 km ) from the centre of coventry and from nuneaton . within a mile were the late 18th- and 19th-century coal field/pit and colliery of the small town of bedworth . from hawkesbury , it runs southeast through the warwickshire countryside for to rugby . the route between coventry and rugby is level , with no locks , apart from the stop lock at the junction . parts of this section were straightened by raising and waterproofing in the 1820s ; the remains of a more circuitous route ( which kept to the chosen contour ) can still be seen in places . the canal winds through the northern part of rugby . it passes through the newbold tunnel . in the churchyard in newbold-on-avon remains can be seen of an earlier canal tunnel built in the 1770s . it scales a flight of three locks at hillmorton about east-southeast of the town . east of rugby , the canal passes southwest then south . it crosses under the m45 motorway and through broad low fields interspersed by views of wooded knolls and modest hills of northamptonshire and warwickshire to reach braunston . west of braunston village centre , by a pub , the canal converges with the grand union canal where both change direction to west-southwest . the latter canal has a major wharf , braunston marina , east and a campsite . the combined canal splits north of napton-on-the-hill : the oxford canal runs southwest and then turns south towards oxford via banbury . the grand union canal runs north passing opposing marinas within a mile then northwest to birmingham via warwick . after winding round napton hill , the canal ascends the napton flight of nine locks to a local summit reach , well below the hilltop . after passing an old wharf and a pub at fenny compton , the canal enters a long cutting which until some time in the 19th century was a tunnel . this section is normally referred to as a '' tunnel straight '' or the fenny compton tunnel . the route between the farms of priors hardwick and fenny compton was never straightened , and is the most circuitous in the region : taking to cover ( geodesically , as the crow flies ) . this coincides with the canal 's highest '' summit '' reach in navigational terms . this reach is the '' eleven-mile pound '' mentioned in tom rolt 's narrow boat . the canal then descends the claydon flight of locks and into the vale of the nascent cherwell at cropredy . the canal descends the valley to oxford . banbury has many visitor moorings alongside the historic and modern shopping areas in the middle of town . banbury town council and cherwell district council treat the canal as an attraction to be encouraged ; examples of its work include an old boatyard which has been incorporated into the town centre : tooley 's boatyard . about south is a lightly-settled locality , twyford wharf , where narrow boats up to can be turned . two villages nearby , kings sutton and adderbury ( twyford ) , are within 30 minutes ' walking distance along the road . both offer several pubs . within oxford 's conurbation , the end of the canal has two links to the thames : north of the city where dukes cut leads to king 's lock ; a few hundred yards ( metres ) from the heart of the city centre by oxford railway station . below isis lock ( known to boatmen as 'louse lock ' ) through sheepwash channel . this leads to an elongated navigable circuit at the thames called '' four rivers '' above osney lock . after below isis lock the oxford canal ends abruptly at hythe bridge street near to the current hythe bridge over the castle mill stream , a backwater of the river thames that runs parallel to the oxford canal for its southernmost part . the canal used to continue through a bridge under hythe bridge street to a turning basin and goods wharf south of hythe bridge street . it then continued via a bridge under worcester street to end in a coal wharf beside new road . in 1951 the basin and wharves were filled in and nuffield college has taken part of the site . the locks on the canal are as follows . the canal rises from hawkesbury junction to hilmorton top lock , there is then a pound to braunston junction , where it joins the grand union canal . from napton junction the oxford canal rises again though the napton locks . after napton top lock there is a pound to claydon top lock , from where the canal falls towards oxford . history . construction . the oxford canal was constructed in several stages over a period of more than twenty years . in 1769 an act of parliament authorising the oxford canal was passed , having been promoted in parliament by sir roger newdigate mp , who chaired the canal company . the intention was to link the industrial english midlands to london via the river thames . construction began shortly after near coventry . surveying of the route and initial construction were originally supervised by the celebrated engineer james brindley , assisted by samuel simcock who was also brindley 's brother-in-law . brindley died in 1772 but simcock took over and completed the canal . by 1774 the canal had reached napton , but the company was already running out of money . in 1775 , a second act was passed allowing the company to raise more funds . construction soon started again and by 1778 the canal had reached banbury . financial problems meant that work on the final stretch to oxford did not begin until 1786 . the stretch of the canal from banbury to oxford was built as cheaply as possible . many economy measures were used . wherever possible , wooden lift or swing bridges were built instead of expensive brick ones . deep locks were used wherever possible , with single gates at both ends instead of double gates . a stretch of the river cherwell at shipton-on-cherwell was incorporated into the canal . this reduced construction costs , but the behaviour of the river makes the canal more difficult to use . this was a false economy and its adverse effects continue to be felt to this day . the oxford canal reached the outskirts of oxford in 1789 , when a coal wharf was opened at heyfield hutt , now the site of hayfield road . the final section into central oxford was ceremonially opened on 1 january 1790 . . commercial use . for the next 15 years the oxford canal became one of the most important and profitable transport links in britain , with most commercial traffic between london and the midlands using the route . its principal traffic was coal from warwickshire . it also carried stone , agriculture products and other goods . a much more direct route between london and the midlands , the grand union canal , was completed in 1805 . much of the london-bound traffic switched to this faster route , as it avoided the passage of the river thames which still had many flash locks . this greatly reduced oxford canal traffic south of napton . however , the short section between braunston and napton became the link between the warwick and napton canal and the grand junction canal , making it part of the busy direct route between birmingham and london . the grand junction and oxford canal companies were bitter rivals . when parliament considered the act of parliament for the building of the grand junction , the oxford canal successfully petitioned to make the grand junction pay '' bar tolls '' to the oxford canal to compensate for the loss of traffic south of napton . traffic from birmingham had to use of the oxford canal to get from braunston to join the grand junction at napton . the oxford canal exploited this by charging high tolls for grand junction traffic on this short section . the oxford canal was originally built as a contour canal , meaning that it twisted around hills to minimise vertical deviations from a level contour . however , with one eye on the developing railway network , in 1827 mr . brunel re-surveyed the northern section of the canal between braunston and hawkesbury junction to straighten it out and reduce navigation time . this work between 1830 and 1834 reduced the distance by . the section south of napton was never straightened . the straightening challenged the capacity of three locks at hillmorton , the first on the canal after the stop lock at hawkesbury junction . the solution to the congestion was to duplicate or twin the existing locks at hillmorton , creating three pairs of two parallel narrow locks , which allowed twice the traffic to pass the lock at any time . the work to double the locks was completed in august 1840 . not only was the capacity doubled , but the time taken was decreased as the locks were narrower . tests showed that the locks could be operated in as little as 1 minute 20 seconds . in 1833 a section of the new line of canal in barby fields near dunchurch was used as a test site for a new wrought iron boat , swallow , built by graham and houston . drawn by two horses , the boat completed a distance of 1.5 mile in 7 minutes 35 seconds , a speed of almost 12 miles per hour . the northern section of the oxford canal between coventry , braunston and napton remained an important trunk route , and remained extremely busy with freight traffic until the 1960s . the staple traffic was coal from the warwickshire and leicestershire coalfields to london via the grand union canal . however , the southern section from napton to oxford became something of a backwater , and carried mostly local traffic . decline . in 1937 baron nuffield ( later viscount nuffield ) bought the canal basin at oxford for £133,373 . in 1951 he filled it in and built nuffield college on part of the former coal wharf . coal traffic was relocated to a canal wharf in juxon street , in jericho , oxford . the goods wharf and the remainder of the coal wharf are now under a public car park that nuffield college lets to oxford city council . the oxford canal remained independent until it was nationalised in 1948 and became part of the docks and inland waterways executive , later the british waterways board . many oxford canal boatmen and women favoured horse traction long after those on other canals had changed their narrowboats to diesel power . one narrowboat carrying coal on the oxford canal was drawn by a mule until 1959 and was the last horse-drawn freight narrowboat in great britain . this boat , friendship , is preserved at the national waterways museum , ellesmere port . the oxford canal remained profitable until the mid-1950s , paying a dividend right up until nationalisation . as with most of britain 's narrow canal system , the oxford canal suffered from a rapid decline in freight traffic after the second world war . by the mid-1950s very few narrowboats traded south of napton and the southern section was at one point being threatened with closure , although the northern section ( napton to coventry ) remained well-used by commercial traffic until the 1960s . revival . during the 1960s pleasure boating began to grow in popularity and replace the old trading boats , after a fact-finding cruise on the canal , barbara castle ( minister for transport ) rejected a proposal for closure . the canal is now thriving . in the summer it is one of the most crowded canals on the network . oxford canal walk . the towpath of the canal , with a extension from hawkesbury junction to coventry on the towpath of the coventry canal , forms the oxford canal walk . the stretch from oxford to kirtlington , where the oxfordshire way meets the canal , is also part of european walking route e2 . ramblers association : info on oxford canal walk the canal walk is popular with geocachers with many geocache sites located alongside the canal . . see also . canals of great britain eagle ironworks , oxford history of the british canal system . references . notes bibliography . external links . canal & river trust webpage about the oxford canal detail of towns , history etc . along the oxford canal