Malayalam literature

early literature . pattu . for the first 600 years of the malayalam calendar , malayalam literature remained in a preliminary stage . during this time , malayalam literature consisted mainly of various genres of songs ( pattu ) . prominent were songs praising the goddesses of the land , ballads of brave warriors , songs related to the work of a particular caste and songs intended just for entertainment . bhadrakali pattu , thottam pattu , mappila pattu , mavaratham pattu , sasthanga pattu , nizhalkoothu pattu , sarpa pattu , sastham pattu , thiyyattu pattu , pulluvar pattu , mannar pattu , panar pattu , krishi pattu , thamburan pattu , pada pattu , villadichan pattu , onappattu , kummi and lullaby were some of the major subgenres . these names were not used historically , but are used in modern times to describe the song genres of that time . dr . k . ayyappa paniker ( 1977 ) . a short history of malayalam literature . . ramacharitham . ramacharitham is a collection of poems written at the end of the preliminary stage . it is the oldest malayalam book available . the collection has 1,814 poems in it . ramacharitham mainly consists of stories from the yuddha kanda of the ramayana . it was written by a poet with the pen name cheeramakavi who , according to poet ulloor s parameswara iyer , was sree veerarama varman , a king of travancore from ad 1195 to 1208 . other experts , like dr . k.m . george and p.v . krishnan nair , claim that the origins of the book can be found in north kerala . they cite the use of certain words in the book and also the fact that the manuscript of the book was recovered from neeleshwaram in north kerala . some experts consider it a tamil literary piece . a . r . rajaraja varma , is of the opinion that malayalam originated from ancient tamil . ramacharitham is considered a book written during the formative years of malayalam . according to rev . dr . hermann gundert , who compiled the first dictionary of the malayalam language , ramacharitham shows the ancient style of the malayalam language . . manipravalam . while the pattu school flourished among certain sections of the society , the literature of the elite was composed in the curious mixture of sanskrit and malayalam which is referred to as manipravalam , mani meaning ruby ( malayalam ) and pravalam meaning coral ( sanskrit ) . ke rāmacandr̲an nāyar ( 1971 ) . early manipravalam : a study . anjali . foreign language study . pp.78 lilathilakam , a work on grammar and rhetoric , written in the last quarter of the 14th century discusses the relationship between manipravalam and pattu as poetic forms . it lays special emphasis on the types of words that blend harmoniously . it points out that the rules of sanskrit prosody should be followed in manipravalam poetry . this particular school of poetry was patronised by the upper classes , especially the nambudiris . dramatic performances given in koothambalams , known by the names of koothu and koodiyattom , often used sanskrit and malayalam . in koodiyattom , the clown ( vidooshaka ) is allowed to use malayalam while the hero recites slokas in sanskrit . tholan , a legendary court poet in the period of the kulasekhara kings , is believed to have started this practice . the earliest of these works in the manipravalam school is vaisika tantram written in the 13th century . it contains about 200 quatrains in sanskrit metres and is in the form of professional advice given to a prostitute or courtesan by her mother . each quatrain is composed with care and due weight is given to the rules of rhetoric . several quatrains of this type are quoted in lilathilakam by way of illustration for the several rules of grammar and rhetoric . the most representative of the early manipravalam works are the tales of courtesans ( achi charitams ) and the message poems ( sandesa kavyas ) . unniyachi charitam , unnichiruthevi charitam and unniyadi charitam are examples of the former type which is known by the name champu . the padya ( verse ) portion is in sanskrit metres and the gadya ( prose ) portion is mostly in dravidian metres . authorship of unniyachi charitam and unnichiruthevi charitam is not known and only a portion of the works is now available . unniyadi charitam , which also exists in a fragmented form , is supposed to be written by damodara chakkiar . the sandesa kavyas are an important poetic genre in sanskrit , and on the model of kalidasa 's meghadūta and lakshmidasa 's sukasandesa , a number of message poems came to be written first in manipravalam and later in pure malayalam . the best known among these sandesas is perhaps unnuneeli sandesam written in the 14th century . the poem is written under the pen-name amruthanilakshi , and some believe that it was written in 1362 ce . the exact identity of the author remains a mystery , but it is widely believed that one of the members of the travancore royal family wrote it . the next work to be mentioned is ramakathapattu , as it is popularly known , though the author calls it ramayanakavyam . the author is ayyappilli asan who lived sometime about 1400 ce at auvatutura near kovalam and whom p . k . narayana pillai , who discovered the full text of the book in 1965 , calls '' the homer of malayalam . '' ramakathapattu contains 3163 songs in 279 vrittas or parts . . niranam poets . while the manipravala poetry flourished as a diversion from the mainstream , the tradition set up by cheeraman of ramacharitamand the more enlightened among the anonymous folk poets was resumed and replenished by three writers commonly referred to as niranam poets , being niranam poets , sankara panikkar and rama panikkar . they were influenced by the bhakti movement . the bhakti school was thus revived , and in the place of the excessive sensuality and eroticism of the manipravalam poets , the seriousness of the poetic vocation was reasserted by them . it is believed that they all belonged to the same kannassa family and that madhava panikkar and sankara panikkar were the uncles of rama panikkar , the youngest of the three . their most important work is kannasa ramayanam which is an important link between ramacharitam , ramakathapattu and ezhuthachan 's adhyathmaramayanam . ulloor has said that rama panikkar holds the same position in malayalam literature that edmund spenser has in english literature . . later champus and krishnagatha . the 15th century ce saw two paralleled movements in malayalam literature : one spearheaded by the manipravalam works , especially the champus , and the other emanating from the pattu school and adumbrated in cherusseri 's magnum opus , krishnagatha ( song of krishna ) . the language of the later champus reads more like modern malayalam than that of the earlier champus and sandesa kavyas . champus were mostly works of satire and hyperbole was a regular feature of it . the greatest champus of the 15th century is punam nambudiri 's ramayanam which uses puranic themes and episodes unlike the 14th century champus which were tales of the courtesans . punam also wrote a bharatam champoo . there are also many others , the authorship of which is ascribed to him . the later champus came to be used for dramatic oral narration by performing artists in their koothu and patakam . mahishamangalam ( or mazhamangalam ) narayanan nambudiri who lived in the 16th century is the author of some of the best champus of all time . the most widely known of these is naishadham followed by rajaratnavaliyam and kodia viraham . chandrotsavam , whose authorship is unknown , is a long narrative poem written in manipravalam . the elitist manipravala champu school disappeared by the end of the 16th century . the average readers without much grounding in sanskrit had their favourite poems and poets in the so-called pattu school . with the writing of krishnagatha by cherusseri , the validity of the use of spoken malayalam for literary purposes received its ultimate justification . unlike the language of ramacharitam and the works of the niranam poets , the language of krishnagatha marks the culmination of a stage of evolution . there is some dispute about the author 's name and his identity . some scholars are of opinion that he was the same as the punam nambudiri of the champus . it is widely believed that cherusseri lived in the 15th century ce and was the court poet of udayavarma of kolathunadu . medieval literature : 16th to 19th century . bhakti era . malayalam literature passed through a tremendous process of development in the 15th and 16th centuries . cherusseri 's krishnagatha bore witness to the evolution of modern malayalam language as a proper medium for serious poetic communication . alongside this , there flourished numerous sanskrit poets who were very active during this period . the greatest of them was melpathur narayana bhattathiri ( 1559–1665 ) , the author of narayaniyam . the most significant development of the time took place in the field of malayalam poetry . thunchaththu ezhuthachan wrote his two great epics adhyathmaramayanam and srimahabharatam and two shorter pieces , irupathinalu vrittam and harinama kirtanam and thereby revolutionised malayalam language and literature at once . ezhuthachan refined the style of malayalam language and it was during his period that malayalam literature attained its individuality and malayalam became a fully fledged independent language . today he is known as the father of malayalam language and its literature . the kilippattu form he adopted in ramayanam and bharatam may be a pointer to his recognition of the importance of sound effect in poetry . ezhuthachan is perhaps the greatest spokesman of the bhakti movement in malayalam but he is more than a writer of devotional hymns . k . ayyappa paniker has noted that '' the transition from cherrusseri to ezhuthachan marks the triumph of modernism over medievalism . '' another important poet of this period was poonthanam ( 1547–1640 ) . his chief poems are jnanappana ( the song of divine wisdom ) , bhasha karnamritam and kumaraharanam or santanagopalam pana . performance arts . the 16th century also saw the writing of some dramatic works in manipravalam and pure malayalam , bharatavakyam , often described as a choral narration , is a work in manipravalam which was used for stage performance . the main development in the cultural field in kerala in the 17th century was the growth of a new form of visual art called kathakali , which brought into being a new genre of poetry called attakkatha consisting of the libretto used for a kathakali performance . the origins of aattakatha literature dates back to the 12th century and it emerged as a literary genre in the 17th century . the earliest of the aattakathas is believed to be a cycle of eight ramayana stories ( collectively known as ramanattam ) , composed by kottarakkara tampuran and about whose date there is an ongoing controversy . next in importance are the works of kottayathu tampuran whose period is about the middle of the seventeenth century . since the four aattakathas he wrote bakavadham , kalyanasaugandhikam , kirmeeravadham and kalakeyavadham punctiliously conform to the strict rules of kathakali , they are particularly favoured by orthodox artistes and their patrons . another poet of this category is irayimman thampi ( 1783–1863 ) . unnayi variyar 's nalacharitham aattakatha is one of the most famous works in this genre . margamkali was the form of ritual and entertainment among the syrian christians corresponding to the sanghakali of the brahmins . margamkalippattu is the song for this performance depicting the story of thomas the apostle . this was one of the numerous pieces of christian literature that must have gained currency in the 16th and 17th centuries . in the court of travancore king marthanda varma ( 1706–1758 ) and his successor dharma raja , there flourished a number of poets distinguished in several ways . ramapurathu warrier ( 1703–1753 ) , the author of kuchela vrittam vanchippattu , was one of them . the vanchippattu or boat song is a poetic form of folk origin composed entirely in the dravidian metre nathonnata . kunchan nambiar ( 1705–1770 ) , the founder of thullal and its rich literature , is often considered as the master of malayalam satirist poetry . born in killikkurussimangalam , he spent his boyhood at kudamalur and youth at ambalappuzha . 1748 he moved to the court of marthanda varma and later to the court of his successor dharma raja . the word '' thullal '' literally means '' dance '' , but under this name nambiar devised a new style of verse narration with a little background music and dance-like swinging movement to wean the people away from the chakkiyar koothu , which was the art form popular till then . he used pure malayalam as opposed to the stylised and sanskritised malayalam language of chakkiyar koothu . he also adopted many elements from padayani and kolam thullal and certain other local folk arts . there are three kinds of tullal distinguished on the basis of the performer 's costume and the style of rendering , viz . , ottan , sitankan and parayan . dravidian metres are used throughout although there is a quatrain in a sanskrit metre . prose literature . there was a great lull in the field of literary creation in malayalam for nearly a century after the death of kunchan nambiar . there was however a consistent and steady development of prose at this time . the evolution of prose literature in the early centuries was a very slow process . in the wake of bhashakautaliyam several translations began to appear in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries . the prose of attaprakarams was meant to aid the chakiyars in learning the art of koodiyattom . doothavakyam ( 14th century ce ) is one of the earliest of these works . 15th century malayalam prose is represented by brahmanda puranam , a summary of the original in sanskrit . a large number of prose works appeared during this period , most of which are either narrative based on puranas and religious works in sanskrit or commentaries on similar works . with the starting of the first printing presses in the 16th century by christian missionaries , prose literature received a great boost . several regional versions of keralolpathi , tracing the beginnings of kerala history , began to appear in the 18th century . paremmakkal thoma kathanar ( 1737–1799 ) wrote the first travelogue in malayalam , varthamanapustakam ( book of news ) . the works of christian missionaries like johann ernst hanxleden , 1699–1732 ) and paulinose patiri ( john philip wesdin , 1748–1806 ) also led to a widening of the range of topics and themes in malayalam literature . venmani school . the third quarter of the nineteenth century bore witness to the rise of a new school of poets devoted to the observation of life around them and the use of pure malayalam . the major poets of the venmani school were venmani achhan nambudiripad ( 1817–1891 ) , venmani mahan nambudiripad ( 1844–1893 ) , poonthottam achhan nambudiri ( 1821–1865 ) , poonthottam mahan nambudiri ( 1857–1896 ) and the members of the kodungallur kovilakam ( royal family ) such as kodungallur kunjikkuttan thampuran . the style of these poets became quite popular for a while and influenced even others who were not members of the group like velutheri kesavan vaidyar ( 1839–1897 ) and perunlli krishnan vaidyan ( 1863–1894 ) . the venmani school pioneered a style of poetry that was associated with common day themes , and the use of pure malayalam rather than sanskrit . the poetry was therefore easily understood by the common man . the works were known for its humour , wit , and lyrical metre . modern prose literature . nineteenth century was not a very creative period for malayalam literature ( except towards the end ) from the point of view of imaginative writing . but the foundations for the great renaissance that began at the end of the century were laid during this period . the establishment of colleges for imparting english education , the translation of the bible and other religious works , the compilation of dictionaries and grammars , the formation of the text book committee , the growth of printing presses , the starting of newspapers and periodicals , the introduction of science and technology , the beginning of industrialization and the awakening of social and political consciousness : these constitute the giant strides towards modernisation . like his predecessors swathi thirunal and uthram thirunal , ayilyam thirunal ( 1832–1880 ) and visakham thirunal ( 1837–1885 ) were great patrons of letters and were themselves talented writers . christian missionaries benjamin bailey ( 1805–1871 ) , joseph peet , richard collins and george mathen ( 1819–1870 ) were responsible for many works on malayalam language based on western models . perhaps the most important of these missionaries was herman gundert ( 1814–1893 ) . born in stuttgart in germany and educated at tübingen and switzerland , gundert came to india in 1836 . he wrote over twenty books in malayalam , the most important of which are a malayalam-english dictionary , a grammar of malayalam , keralappazhama and pazhamcholmala . the first authoritative grammar of malayalam was also gundert 's contribution ( 1851 ) . this led to the production of a number of grammatical works in malayalam . vaikkam patchu moothathu ( 1814–1883 ) published his grammar of malayalam in 1876 , kerala kaumudi by kovunni nedungadi ( 1831–1889 ) came out in 1878 . this was soon followed by the first history of the language by p . govinda pillai ( 1849–1897 ) published in 1881 . the first work on rhetoric in malayalam on the european model was brought out by father gerad under the title alankara sastram in the same year . by the end of the 19th century two different traditions could be clearly distinguished in malayalam literature : the western school and the oriental or traditionalist school . writers such as kerala varma valiya koyithampuran represent the confluence of these two major traditions . his major works include mayurasandesam ( peacock message ) and the translations of kalidasa 's abhijñānaśākuntalam ( which got him the title of kerala kalidasa ) , and of von limburg brower 's akbar . meanwhile , many literary magazines were established to encourage all kinds of writers and writings , such as c . p . achutha menon 's vidyavinodini , kandathil varghese mappillai 's bhashaposhini and appan thampuran 's rasikaranjini . in the wake of kerala varma 's translation of abhijñānaśākuntalam , several attempts were made to translate numerous plays from sanskrit and english into malayalam . these plays were seldom acted . the stage conditions of those days were crude and unfit to project a performance . as if irritated by this imitation plays of low quality , p . rama kurup wrote chakki chankaram ( 1893 ) . kerala varma 's nephew a . r . raja raja varma went a step further than his uncle in the promotion of a synthesis between the different trends current in the literature of his time . a professor in the university college thiruvananthapuram , he had to modernize the process of teaching malayalam language and literature ; this made him write books on grammar and rhetoric ( which earned him the title of kerala pāṇini ) and eventually prepare the ground for an enlightened renaissance in malayalam poetry and literary criticism . a close associate of both kerala varma and raja raja varma , k . c . kesava pillai wrote kesaviyam ( a mahakavya ) and a number of attakkathas . azhakathu padmanabha kurup ( 1869–1932 : author of ramachandravilasam ) , pandalam kerala varma ( 1879–1919 : author of rukmangatha charitam ) , kattakkayam cherian mappila ( 1859 – 1937 : author of sri yesu vijayam ) , ulloor s . parameswara iyer ( 1877–1949 : author of umakeralam ) and vallathol narayana menon ( 1879–1958 : author of chitrayogam ) , all paid their obeisance to this neoclassicist trend . the developments in prose at this time were very significant , vengayil kunhiraman nayanar ( 1861–1895 ) , more famous under his pseudonym kesari , was one of the first to explore the essay form in malayalam . he was closely associated with periodicals like kerala chandrika ( started in 1879 at thiruvananthapuram ) , kerala patrika ( started in 1884 by c . kunhiraman menon ( 1854–1936 ) and appu nedungadi ( 1866–1934 ) at kozhikode ) , kerala sanchari ( after 1898 under the editorship of murkoth kumaran ) and the english journal malabar spectator . his vasanavikriti is considered by historians and literary experts as the first short story in malayalam literature . it was published in vidyavinodini in 1891 . fulmoni ennum koruna ennum peraya randu sthreekalude katha ( phulmōni ennuṁ kōruṇa ennuṁ pērāya ranṭu strīkaḷuṭe katha ) , a translation of hana catherine mullens 's bengali novel fulmoni o korunar biboron by rev . joseph peet , is believed to be the first novel printed and released in malayalam ( 1858 ) . ghathakawadham ( ghātakavadhaṁ , 1877 ) by rev . richard collins was the first novel printed and published in malayalam with a story based in kerala and around malayalis . the first novel conceived and published in malayalam was appu nedungadi 's kundalatha ( 1887 ) . though kundalatha is not considered a major novel , it gets the pride of place as the first work in the language having the basic characteristics of a novel . o . chandhu menon 's indulekha was the first major novel in malayalam language . it was a landmark in the history of malayalam literature and initiated the novel as a new flourishing genre . the title refers to the main character in this novel , a beautiful , well educated nair lady of 18 years . c . v . raman pillai 's marthandavarma ( 1891 ) had many distinctions : it was the first historical novel in any south indian languages , first novel from travancore , first malayalam novel to be a part of a trilogy and the first malayalam novel to have a masculine title . marthandavarma was completed even before indulekha but could not be published until 1891 owing to lack of finance . the novel recounted the history of venad ( travancore ) during the final period of rajah rama varma 's reign and subsequently to the accession of marthanda varma . the novel had a marthanda varma ( film ) in 1933 and was the first malayalam novel to be adapted into film . during the early 20th century , malayalam received outstanding novels , either as translations or adaptations of western literature . the post-independence period saw a fresh start in the history of longer fiction in malayalam as in many other indian languages , parallel to the evolution of post-world war fiction in other parts of the world . it was both a break and a continuation . p . kesava dev , who was a communist in the thirties and forties turned away from diehard ideologies and wrote a symbolic novel called arku vendi ? ( for whose sake ? ) in 1950 , challenging the philosophy of stalinist liquidation of political enemies . it had a special significance in the context of the 'calcutta thesis ' . after portraying the class struggle of farm labourers in randidangazhi ( two measures ) in 1949 , thakazhi sivasankara pillai turned away from party politics and produced a moving romance in chemmeen ( shrimps ) in 1956 . for s . k . pottekkatt and vaikom muhammad basheer , who had not dabbled in politics , the continuity is marked in the former 's vishakanyaka ( poison maid , 1948 ) and the latter 's ntuppuppakkoranendarnnu ( my grandpa had an elephant , 1951 ) . the non-political social or domestic novel was championed by uroob with his ummachu ( 1955 ) and sundarikalum sundaranmarum ( men and women of charm , 1958 ) . in 1957 basheer 's pathummayude aadu ( pathumma 's goat ) brought in a new kind of prose tale , which perhaps only basheer could handle with dexterity . the fifties thus mark the evolution of a new kind of fiction , which had its impact on the short stories as well . this was the auspicious moment for the entry of m . t . vasudevan nair and t . padmanabhan upon the scene . front runners in the post-modern trend include kakkanadan , o . v . vijayan , e . harikumar , m . mukundan and anand . early prose literature . list of early prose literature in the 19th century . . allegories . . see also . indian literature list of malayalam poets list of fiction writers in malayalam malayalam literary awards bible translations into malayalam . references . external links . information on malayalam literature at department of public relations , government of kerala malayalam resource centre