Psittacus

taxonomy and systematics . two species are accepted : grey parrot , congo grey parrot , african grey parrot or congo african grey parrot ( psittacus erithacus , previously psittacus erithacus erithacus ) : this is the nominate species , larger than the timneh at about long , with light-grey feathers , cherry-red tails , and an all-black beak . forshaw & cooper ( 1978 ) . immature birds of this species have tails with a darker , duller red towards the tip ( juniper and parr 1999 ) until their first moult , which occurs by 18 months of age . these birds also initially have grey irises , which change to a pale yellow colour by the time the bird is a year old . the congo grey parrot is found on the islands of príncipe and bioko , and is distributed from southeastern ivory coast to western kenya , northwest tanzania , southern democratic republic of the congo ( drc ) , and northern angola . in aviculture , it is often called a '' cag '' . timneh parrot or timneh african grey parrot ( psittacus timneh , previously psittacus erithacus timneh ) : the timneh parrot is slightly smaller in size than the congo , but intelligence and talking ability remain comparable . they can range from about 22–28 & nbsp ; cm in total length , and are considered a medium size parrot . the timneh has a darker charcoal grey colouring , a darker maroon tail , and a light , horn-coloured area to part of the upper mandible . timneh parrots are endemic to the western parts of the moist upper guinea forests and bordering savannas of west africa from guinea-bissau , sierra leone , and southern mali east to at least east of the bandama river in ivory coast . it is often called a '' tag '' . as pets , timnehs usually begin learning to speak earlier than congos as they mature slightly earlier . the timneh parrot also has a reputation of being less nervous around strangers and novel situations than the congo , but whether this is true or not is still debated . in 2012 , birdlife international gave the timneh parrot full species status and it was classified as vulnerable . some aviculturalists recognize third and fourth species , but these are not distinguishable in scientific studies . . illness and disease . the grey parrot ( psittacus erithacus ) has been known at times to contract a non-infectious inflammatory lung disease called lipid pneumonia . lipid pneumonia can be classified as exogenous or endogenous depending on whether or not the animal inhaled outside material . a necropsy shows that the lungs of a grey parrot with endogenous lipid pneumonia ( enlp ) are firm with a diffuse grey discoloration . enlp is a common illness in other animals as well . the grey parrot is also one of the three parrots that scientists found to commonly suffer from dehydration . the scientists have used plasma osmolality to find more information about the form of dehydration grey parrots have . another disease that the grey parrots get is cardiomyopathy which is a heart disease usually presented at a young age . the reason for this from having parents of the same breed . some other common symptoms in these birds are weakness , coelomic cavity , and retardation . the grey parrot has been known to contract beak and feather disease virus ( bfdv ) which causes a highly contagious and sometimes fatal , psittacine beak and feather disease in parrots . in a pcr-based study , chlamydiosis an infectious disease of avians was found to infect the grey parrot . in the study 253 clinical samples were taken from 27 bird species belonging to seven orders . thirty-two ( 12.6 % ) samples were positive for chlamydi and two new genotypes were discovered : chlamydophila psittaci and chlamydophila abortus . another ailment that grey parrots commonly suffer from is hypocalcemic-induced seizure activity . birds between 2–15 years of age contract it centers around a lack of calcium . a symptom of the syndrome can be unsteadiness while standing or falling off a perch along with neurological anomalies or problems . . behavior and ecology . breeding . grey parrots are monogamy breeders which nests in tree cavities . the hen lays 3-5 eggs , which she incubates for 30 days while being fed by her mate . young leave the nest at the age of 12 weeks . little is known about the courtship behaviour of this species in the wild . . longevity . like many large parrots , greys are longevity birds . the animal ageing and longevity database states the longest reliably recorded longevity for the species in captivity as 49.7 years . also acknowledged are claims of captive grey parrots reaching the ages of 73 and 93 , whereas the world parrot trust lists a longevity of 50–60 years for a grey in captivity . the guinness book of world records listed a grey parrot that allegedly lived in captivity for 72 years as the longest-lived specimen for the species . . intelligence . unlike other parrots , wild greys have been documented imitating the calls of several other species . irene pepperberg 's research with captive greys , most notably with a bird named alex , has scientifically demonstrated that they possess the ability to associate simple human words with meanings , and to intelligently apply the abstract concepts of shape , colour , number , zero-sense , etc . according to pepperberg and other ornithologists , they perform many cognitive tasks at the level of dolphins , chimpanzees , and even human toddlers . as well as labeling objects , alex could verbally express what his wants were , suggesting that grey parrots know the difference between features and feelings . in general , it has been shown that grey parrots are able to learn relatively quickly , though they are limited to simple and non-abstract mediums of thinking . they have been shown to be able to make cognitive inferences , but , like apes , have inter-individual differences in intelligence . for example , in one experiment involving food hidden under cups , it was shown that greys can identify where the food is , usually if shown its original location at first . pet greys may learn to speak within their first year , but many do n't say their first word until 12–18 months old . timnehs are generally observed to start speaking earlier , some in their late first year . both subspecies seem to have the same ability and tendency to produce human speech , but vocal ability and proclivity may range widely among individual birds . grey parrots tend to use more specific calls for different species coming their way which can be known as stimulus specificity , since there is a stimulus vocalization the birds have . one notable grey parrot is n'kisi , which in 2004 was said to have a vocabulary of over 950 words and , like pepperberg 's alex , was noted for creative use of language . nkisi audio text 1 for example , when jane goodall visited n'kisi in his new york home , he greeted her with '' got a chimp ? '' because he had seen pictures of her with chimpanzees in africa . a study published in 2011 , led by dalila bovet of paris west university nanterre la défense , demonstrated grey parrots were able to coordinate and collaborate with each other to an extent . they were able to solve problems set by scientists & mdash ; for example , two birds could pull strings at the same time to obtain food . in another example , one bird stood on a perch to release a food-laden tray , while the other pulled the tray out from the test apparatus . both would then feed . the birds in question were observed waiting for their partners to perform the necessary actions so their behaviour could be synchronized . the parrots appeared to express individual preferences as to which of the other test birds they would work with . in an experiment about local enhancement in grey parrots , food was visibly hidden under two separate cups . the experimenter then lifted the first cup and either removed what was under it or put it back . this was then done again in several different combinations , the cups were lifted in a different order and the food was removed or put back in a different order . instead of remembering which cup had the food , the birds would show preference to the one that was touched last . another series of experiments further tested grey parrots ' cognitive abilities . in general , most animals can not associate sounds with objects , such as food , placed into a cup . while originally only the great apes and young human children were known to make this association with ease , it was found that grey parrots , under most conditions , can also associate sounds with the presence of an object . for the most part , grey parrots performed more successfully if the cup was shaken horizontally before it is given the choice of selecting which contained food , however , further experimentation indicated that it is not a requirement and proved that grey parrots have very high cognitive abilities . . vocalisation . wild grey parrots often whistle , click , or make other sounds . a grey 's owner should expect to hear regular renditions of microwave ovens , telephones , alarm clocks , video games , and other electronic sounds , as well as dripping water , wild birds , and any other sound often heard by the parrot . greys have even been known to repeat the profanity they heard from an owner even after they no longer live with that owner . greys also have the ability to mimic , and distinguish between , the different voices they hear . grey parrots use different alarm calls for different predators coming their way . in an experiment to test the vocalizations of grey parrots , four bred in captivity were placed in an aviary . throughout the day they spent time in a room with toys and came into fairly regular contact with the humans taking care of them . the noises that these parrots could hear consisted of the calls of canaries in the laboratory , people cleaning , doors squeaking , etc . in the next 3 years , the parrots made over 50,000 vocalisations . what was interesting was that , although they were bred in captivity , the sounds they made were not only ones of their immediate surroundings . they also made calls similar to those of other captive grey parrots in different locations and even wild grey parrots . . status and conservation . more rare than previously believed , the grey was uplisted from a species of least concern to near threatened in the 2007 iucn red list . see birdlife international ( 2007a . b ) . a recent analysis suggests up to 21 % of the global population may be taken from the wild annually , primarily for the pet trade , as they are good in talking . in 2012 , the species was further uplisted to vulnerable . the species is endemic to primary and secondary rainforests of west and central africa . see juniper , t . and m . parr . 1998 . parrots : a guide to parrots of the world . yale university press , new haven and london . grey parrots depend on large , old trees for the natural hollows they use for nesting . studies in guinea and guinea-bissau have found that greys ' preferred species of nesting trees are also species preferred for timber . see clemmons , j.r . 2003 . status survey of the african grey parrot ( psittacus erithacus timneh ) and development of a management program in guinea and guinea-bissau . cites , geneva , switzerland . the relationship between the status of the species and the status of primary forest is positive : dändliker , g . 1992 . the grey parrot in ghana : a population survey , a contribution to the biology of the species , a study of its commercial exploitation and management recommendations . cites , lausanne , switzerland . where the forests are declining , so too are populations of grey parrots . the grey parrot is listed on appendix ii of the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) . this requires both that exports be accompanied by a permit issued by a national authority and that a finding be made that the export is not detrimental to the species in the wild . with exports totalling more than 350,000 specimens from 1994–2003 , see unep-wcmc cites trade database . the grey parrot is one of the most heavily traded cites-listed bird species . in response to continuing population declines , exceeded quotas , and unsustainable and illegal trade ( including among range states ) , cites included the grey parrot in phase vi of the cites review of significant trade in 2004 . this review has resulted in recommended zero export quotas for several range states and a cites decision to develop regional management plans for the species . in the united states , importation of wild-caught grey parrots is prohibited under the us wild bird conservation act of 1992 . in the european union , an eu directive of 2007 prevents importation of this and any other wild-caught birds for the pet trade . relationship with humans . aviculture . these intelligent mimics can make interesting pets and companion parrots . they have a devoted following among parrot owners . however , the same qualities mean they require a special commitment by their owners to provide frequent one-on-one interaction and supervised time out of their cages . they must be kept stimulated and busy by people and toys or they may become stressed and develop self-destructive behaviors . greys require large cages , varied diets that include fresh foods , and plenty of safe and chewable toys . if not provided with these items , these parrots can quickly develop unpleasant behaviours and may eventually develop health problems ( such as feather-plucking ) that are difficult to remedy . even the healthiest , happiest pet parrot will generate a fair amount of mess and noise . like most parrots , they are not domesticated , and even a well-socialized , hand-raised , aviary-bred bird is usually only one or two generations removed from its wild predecessor . despite this , there is a long history of these parrots being kept at pets by the ancient greece , wealthy roman families , king henry viii , portuguese sailors , and others . cultural depictions . the character 'gerard ' in michael crichton 's novel next is a transgenic grey parrot with the capability of doing math . the character 'madison ' in dick king-smith 's novel harry 's mad is a grey parrot . the character 'methuselah ' in barbara kingsolver 's novel the poisonwood bible is a grey parrot . the children 's book friendly feathers : life with pierre , an african grey parrot by fran smith , illustrated by deon matzen , is about a grey parrot . the bird owned by the character 'linus steinman ' in the novel the final solution by michael chabon is a grey parrot . in the book , we 'll always have parrots by donna andrews , a grey parrot helps protagonist meg langslow apprehend the antagonist . in the book , sick as a parrot by liz evans , the parrot in the title is a grey parrot . cat marsala , the main protagonist in '' hard christmas '' by barbara d'amato , has a pet grey parrot named long john silver . in the book somebody else 's summer , bilbo was a grey parrot which belonged to george carr . the character 'polynesia ' in hugh lofting 's doctor dolittle children 's novels is a grey parrot . in the film version , the character was played by a blue and gold macaw . in thomas bernhard 's play immanuel kant , the philosopher praises his psittacus eritacus without end , saying only he understands his logic . mercedes lackey 's short stories '' grey '' and '' grey 's ghost '' feature a grey parrot that has a remarkable bond with her owner . web comic matthew inman ; also known as '' the oatmeal '' , wrote a web comic about his pet grey parrot . online parrot personality '' felix '' through who 's subtitled life parrot advocacy is shared . felix is also featured in 3 books promoting proper companion parrot communication and understanding by author kathy lafollett . . see also . alex ( parrot ) n'kisi hatebeak . references . footnotes . . sources . athan , mattie sue & deter , dianalee ( 2000 ) : the african grey parrot handbook . barron 's pet handbooks , hauppauge , ny . the iucn red list of threatened species : psittacus erithacus ( retrieved 6 july 2011 ) birdlife international ( 2007a ) : 2006–2007 red list status changes . retrieved 26 august 2007 . birdlife international ( 2007b ) : grey parrot – birdlife species factsheet . retrieved 26 august 2007 . brinker , bobbi ( 2005 ) : for the love of greys . forshaw , joseph m . & cooper , william t . ( 1981 ) : parrots of the world ( 3rd ed . ) . lansdowne editions , melbourne , new york . greene , w.t . & batty , j . ( 1993 ) : african grey parrots . beech publishing house , alton . glendell , g . breaking bad habits in parrots ( 2007 ) . glendell , g in veterinary times ( uk ) 18 february 2008 . juniper , tony & parr , mike ( 1998 ) : parrots : a guide to parrots of the world . christopher helm , london . henry george liddell & robert scott ( 1980 ) : a greek-english lexicon ( abridged edition ) . oxford university press , united kingdom . carl linnaeus ( 1758 ) : systema naturae per regna tria naturae , secundum classes , ordines , genera , species , cum characteribus , differentiis , synonymis , locis . ( 10th edition , vol.1 ) . laurentius salvius , holmia ( stockholm ) . mancini , julie r . ( 1998 ) : the african grey . howell book house , new york . moustaki , nikki ( 2004 ) : a new owner 's guide to african grey parrots . tfh publications , neptune city , nj . mulawka , edward j . ( 1984 ) : african grey parrots . tfh publications . pepperberg , irene ( 2002 ) : the alex studies : cognitive and communicative abilities of grey parrots . harvard university press , cambridge , massachusetts & london . wright , maggie ( 2001 ) : african grey parrots : everything about history , care , nutrition , handling , and behavior . barron 's pet handbooks , hauppauge , ny . . external links . world parrot trust parrot encyclopedia – species profile african grey news & conservation honolulu zoo african grey parrot centre information about supporting grey parrots the parrot club an excellent resource for keepers of all parrots tinkerbell & riamfada having a full flighted cag as companion at home and outside african grey parrotfarm having a full african grey parrotfarm