John Whitgift

early life and education . he was the eldest son of henry whitgift , a merchant , of great grimsby , lincolnshire , where he was born , probably between 1530 and 1533 . the whitgift family is thought to have originated in the relatively close yorkshire village of whitgift , adjoining the river ouse . whitgift 's early education was entrusted to his uncle , robert whitgift , abbot of the neighbouring wellow abbey , on whose advice he was sent to st anthony 's school , london . in 1549 he matriculated at queens ' college , cambridge , and in may 1550 he moved to pembroke hall , cambridge , where the martyr john bradford was his tutor . in may 1555 he was elected a fellow of peterhouse . . francis bacon . whitgift taught francis bacon and his elder brother anthony bacon at cambridge university in the 1570s . as their tutor , whitgift bought the brothers their early classical text books , including works by plato , cicero and others . . links with cambridge . having taken holy orders in 1560 , he became chaplain to richard cox , bishop of ely , who collated ( that is , appointed ) him to the rectory of teversham , just to the east of cambridge . in 1563 he was appointed lady margaret 's professor of divinity at the university of cambridge , and his lectures gave such satisfaction to the authorities that on 5 july 1566 they considerably augmented his stipend . the following year he was appointed regius professor of divinity , and became master first of pembroke hall ( 1567 ) and then of trinity in 1570 . he had a principal share in compiling the statutes of the university , which passed the great seal on 25 september 1570 , and in the november following he was chosen as vice-chancellor . while at cambridge he formed a close relationship with andrew perne , sometime vice-chancellor . perne went on to live with whitgift in his old age . puritan satirists would later mock whitgift as '' perne 's boy '' who was willing to carry his cloak-bag – thus suggesting that the two had enjoyed a homosexual relationship . patrick collinson , richard bancroft and elizabethan anti-puritanism , university of cambridge , 2013 . promotions and improvements . whitgift 's theological views were controversial . an aunt with whom he once lodged wrote that '' though she thought at first she had received a saint into her house , she now perceived he was a devil '' . thomas macaulay 's description of whitgift as '' a narrow , mean , tyrannical priest , who gained power by servility and adulation . '' is , according to the author of his 1911 encyclopædia britannica entry , '' tinged with rhetorical exaggeration ; but undoubtedly whitgift 's extreme high church notions led him to treat the puritans with exceptional intolerance '' . in a pulpit controversy with thomas cartwright regarding the constitutions and customs of the church of england , his oratorical effectiveness proved inferior , but was able to exercise arbitrary authority : together with other heads of the university , he deprived cartwright of his professorship , and in september 1571 whitgift exercised his prerogative as master of trinity to deprive him of his fellowship . in june of the same year whitgift was nominated dean of lincoln . in the following year he published an answere to a certain libel entitled an admonition to the parliament , which led to further controversy between the two churchmen . on 24 march 1577 , whitgift was appointed bishop of worcester , and during the absence of sir henry sidney in ireland in 1577 he acted as vice-president of wales . archbishop of canterbury , 1583–1604 . in august 1583 he was appointed archbishop of canterbury to replace edmund grindal , who had been placed under house arrest after his disagreement with queen elizabeth over '' prophesyings '' and died in office . whitgift placed his stamp on the church of the reformation , and shared elizabeth 's hatred of puritans . although he wrote to elizabeth remonstrating against the alienation of church property , whitgift always retained her special confidence . in his policy against the puritans and in his vigorous enforcement of the subscription test he thoroughly carried out her policy of religious uniformity . he drew up articles aimed at nonconforming ministers , and obtained increased powers for the court of high commission . in 1586 , he became a privy councillor . his actions gave rise to the martin marprelate tracts , in which the bishops and clergy were strongly opposed . by his vigilance the printers of the tracts were discovered and punished , though the main writer job throkmorton evaded him . whitgift had nine leading presbyterians including thomas cartwright arrested in 1589–90 , and though their trial in the star chamber for sedition did not result in convictions they did agree to abandon their movement in return for freedom . whitgift took a strong line against the brownist movement and their underground church in london led by henry barrow and john greenwood . their services were repeatedly raided and members held in prison . whitgift repeatedly interrogated them through the high commission , and at the privy council . when burghley asked barrow his opinion of the archbishop , he responded : '' he is a monster , a miserable compound , i know not what to make him . he is neither ecclesiastical nor civil , even that second beast spoken of in revelation . '' whitgift was the prime mover behind the act against seditious sectaries which was passed in 1593 , making brownist a felony , and he had barrow and greenwood executed the following morning . in the controversy between walter travers and richard hooker , he prohibited the former from preaching , and he presented the latter with the rectory of boscombe in wiltshire , to help him complete his ecclesiastical polity , a work that in the end did not represent whitgift 's theological or ecclesiastical standpoints . in 1587 , he had welsh preacher john penry brought before the high commission , and imprisoned ; whitgift signed penry 's death warrant six years later . in 1595 , in conjunction with the bishop of london and other prelates , he drew up the calvinist instrument known as the lambeth articles . although the articles were signed and agreed by several bishops they were recalled by order of elizabeth , claiming that the bishops had acted without her explicit consent . whitgift maintained that she had given her approval . whitgift attended elizabeth on her deathbed , and crowned james i . he was present at the hampton court conference in january 1604 , at which he represented eight bishops . he died at lambeth at the end of the following month . he was buried in croydon at the parish church of st john baptist ( now croydon minster ) : his monument there with his recumbent effigy was practically destroyed when the church burnt down in 1867 . legacy . whitgift is described by his biographer , sir george paule , as of '' middle stature , strong and well shaped , of a grave countenance and brown complexion , black hair and eyes , his beard neither long nor thick . '' he left several unpublished works , included in the manuscripts angliae . many of his letters , articles and injunctions are calendared in the published volumes of the state papers series of the reign of elizabeth . his collected works , edited for the parker society by john ayre ( 3 vols . , cambridge , 1851–1853 ) , include the controversial tracts mentioned above , two sermons published during his lifetime , a selection from his letters to cecil and others , and some portions of his previously unpublished manuscripts . in his later years he concerned himself with various administrative reforms , including fostering learning among the clergy , abolishing non-resident clergy , and reforming the ecclesiastical courts . f . l . cross , oxford dictionary of the christian church whitgift set up charitable foundations ( almshouses ) , now the whitgift foundation , in croydon , the site of a palace , a summer retreat of archbishops of canterbury . it supports homes for the elderly and infirm , and runs three independent schools – whitgift school , founded in 1596 , history of whitgift school trinity school of john whitgift and , more recently , old palace school for girls , which is housed in the former croydon palace . whitgift street near lambeth palace ( the official london residence of the archbishop of canterbury ) is named after him . a comprehensive school in his home town of grimsby , john whitgift academy , is named after him . whitgift school , grimsby the whitgift centre , a major shopping centre in croydon , is named after him . it is built on land still owned by the whitgift foundation . references . sources . whitgift , john , the oxford dictionary of the christian church edited by f . l . cross , ( 1957 ) . life of whitgift by sir george paule , 1612 , 2nd ed . 1649 . it was embodied by john strype in his life and acts of whitgift ( 1718 ) . a life included in wordsworth 's ecclesiastical biography ( 1810 ) w . f . hook , archbishops of canterbury ( 1875 ) vol . i . of whitgift 's collected works c . h . cooper , athenae cantabrigienses . the master of trinity at trinity college , cambridge . external links . the life and acts of john whitgift , d.d . , volume i by john strype ( 1822 ed . ) the life and acts of john whitgift , d.d . , volume ii by john strype ( 1822 ed . ) the life and acts of john whitgift , d.d . , volume iii by john strype ( 1822 ed . ) the whitgift foundation timeline of the whitgift foundation