Alternative 3

overview . the programme was presented as an edition of an anglia tv series called science report . director returns to relive tv hoax that shocked the world - press release - uea the intended transmission date was 1 april , but it seems that anglia was unable to obtain an itv network slot for the programme on that date due to strike action/labour disputes . the script was written by chris miles and david ambrose . music was supplied by brian eno , a portion of his score being released on the album music for films ( 1978 ) . apart from the presenter tim brinton , all the characters in the programme were played by actors who were explicitly credited at the end . the episode began by detailing the so-called '' brain drain '' : a number of mysterious disappearances and deaths of physicists , engineers , astronomers , and others in related fields . among the strange deaths reported was that of one '' professor ballantine '' of jodrell bank . before his death , ballantine delivers a videotape to a friend in the press , but upon playback the tape appears to contain only static . according to the research presented in the episode , it was hypothesized that the missing scientists were involved in a secret american/soviet plan in outer space , and further suggested that interplanetary space travel had been possible for much longer than was commonly accepted . the episode featured an apollo astronaut '' bob grodin '' ( played by shane rimmer ) who claims to have stumbled on a mysterious lunar base during his moonwalk . it was claimed that scientists had determined that the earth 's surface would be unable to support life for much longer , due to pollution leading to catastrophic climate change . physicist '' dr carl gerstein '' ( played by richard marner ) claimed to have proposed in 1957 that there were three alternatives to this problem . the first alternative was the drastic reduction of the human population on earth . the second alternative was the construction of vast underground shelters to house government officials and a cross section of the population until the climate had stabilised , a solution reminiscent of the finale of dr strangelove . the third alternative , the so-called '' alternative 3 '' , was to populate mars via a way station on the moon . the programme ends with some detective work ; acting on information from grodin , the reporters determine that ballantine 's videotape requires a special decoding device . after locating the decoder , the resulting video turns out to depict a joint american and russian landing on the martian surface in 1962 . production . the programme was made with stock film used at the time to make it appear like a conventional documentary programme . in a 1989 interview , actor richard marner ( dr carl gerstein ) said he did n't rehearse his lines to make the delivery appear as natural as possible . . reception . within minutes of the programme ending , anglia television was flooded with telephone calls demanding more information . callers were told the programme was a hoax . the times on 21 june reported , '' independent television companies last night received hundreds of protest calls after an anglia programme , alternative 3 , gave alarming facts about changes in the earth 's atmosphere . it was a hoax , originally intended for april 1st . '' it also pointed out that several of the characters in the programme were played by well-known actors . nick austin , who was editorial director of sphere books when watkins ' adaptation was commissioned and published , writes that the book was the '' best chance i 'd ever be likely to get to participate in a hoax of truly guy grand proportions — the best thing of its kind since orson welles ' war of the worlds radio broadcast . '' austin writes that he was both delighted and disturbed by the alternative 3 controversy , and adds that the reasons '' a clever hoax , openly admitted to be such by its creators , should continue to exercise the fascination it so obviously does the best part of a generation after its first appearance is beyond my feeble powers of analysis and explanation . '' fortean times magazine articles a more detailed explanation of the hoax is featured in a study of conspiracy theory subculture and literature , a culture of conspiracy : apocalyptic visions in contemporary america ( 2003 ) , wherein michael barkun devotes a few pages to alternative 3 . barkun writes that '' alternative 3 was clearly a hoax — and not only because it was intended for broadcast on april fools ' day . the interviews with supposed scientists , astronauts , and others were far too dramatically polished to have been spontaneous , and in any case , the episode 's closing credits named the actors who took the roles of interviewees and correspondents . though artfully produced , the show 's counterfeit documentary style could scarcely have been expected to fool many . as an anglia tv spokesman put it , 'we felt viewers would be fairly sophisticated about it . ' '' barkun notes that television and newspapers were '' swamped '' with inquiries about alternative 3 and that anglia television 's sale of the book rights to leslie watkins caused the tale to spread far beyond the united kingdom . books . in 1978 , leslie watkins wrote a science fiction book based on the screenplay for the television episode . watkins had previously written a few moderately successful '' suspense thriller '' novels , and his alternative 3 novelization detailed many of the claims presented in the episode . it was published by sphere books ltd , of gray 's inn road , london . in the book , many of the fictional characters were replaced with real people . for example , quotes from the fictional astronaut bob grodin were attributed to real life astronauts buzz aldrin and edgar mitchell . jim keith 's casebook on alternative 3 : ufo 's , secret societies and world control argues that some elements of the 1977 broadcast were in fact true . jim keith , casebook on alternative 3 : ufo 's , secret societies and world control ( illuminet pr ) ken mitchell 's novel , alternative 3 uses the alternative 3 scenario as a background to a techno-thriller . ken mitchell , alternative 3 ( harpercollins ) on 20 june 2010 , the 33rd anniversary of the original anglia television broadcast , an allegedly '' unexpurgated '' edition of the alternative 3 text was released as an ebook . . dvd release . the film was released on dvd in october 2007 , together with a 30-minute featurette with presenter tim brinton and writers david ambrose and christopher miles who also directed alternative 3 ; a production stills gallery ; and contemporary press cuttings presented in the form of slowly scrolling rostrum camera shots . the film is taken from a 16mm print with optical sound . according to miles in the featurette , this is his personal copy , and the only one to have survived . influence . barkun notes that alternative 3 and the intermittent availability of watkins ' book '' lent itself to conspiracist interpretations , '' and though alternative 3 did not mention ufos or extraterrestrials , many of the plans mentioned in alternative 3 have been featured in later assorted conspiracy theory . barkun argues that alternative 3 was important in that its '' role in the growth of conspiracy theory lay in a later permutation '' related to ufos and the ufo conspiracy theory . milton william cooper , for one , featured similar tales in some of his writings . an episode of the american radio science fiction anthology dimension x featured a plot very similar to the later alternative 3 : on 14 july 1950 episode '' the man in the moon '' , an employee of the fictional united states '' bureau of missing persons '' overhears a radio broadcast from a man who claims to be held prisoner on the moon . the employee investigates , and uncovers the kidnapping of many persons , including scientists and engineers , who are then forced to toil on the moon by german overseers , who had colonized the moon in the late 1930s , and who are preparing an invasion and takeover of the earth . in turn , the movie iron sky ( 2012 ) also tells the story of nazi moon-bases and a planned earth invasion . the novel sold - for a spaceship ( 1973 ) by philip high is set in the aftermath of a global ecological catastrophe ; a ruling elite who escaped into space attempt to return to earth , but find that they are unable to survive , whereas those left behind have adapted . canadian rocker ian thomas ' 1979 song '' pilot '' clearly has links to the alternative 3 mythos . liverpool doom metal band anathema 's 1998 album alternative 4 was also named after the programme . psychedelic rock band monster magnet have a song about the conspiracy , titled '' third alternative '' on their dopes to infinity album . the novel stark by ben elton features a conspiracy of the rich and powerful to escape a doomed earth which is very similar to that depicted in alternative 3 . the song '' alternative three '' on the album karma had it coming by nova scotia punk rock band , the broomhandles , takes inspiration from the program . an alternative soundtrack for the film by members of add n to ( x ) , stereolab and hairy butter was released on lo recordings in 2001 . costa botes cited alternative 3 as one of the influences that inspired him to produce the new zealand mockumentary forgotten silver with peter jackson . a character in richard linklater 's 1991 film slacker , portrayed by jerry delony , claims that alternative 3 is '' absolutely true '' and that humans have been on mars since 1962 . uk punk rock band ufx released a video using allegedly hoax footage from alternative 3 , the roswell alien autopsy and footage of nazi flying saucers to accompany the title track of their 2013 album reverse engineering . references . further reading . . external links . alternative 3 - the most dangerous tv show ever made anomalies network article about alternative 3 christopher miles forty years on the elaborate television hoax that shocked the world anglia - itv news