Nachmanides

name . '' nachmanides '' ( ναχμανίδης ) is a greek-influenced formation meaning '' son of nahman '' . he is also commonly known by the hebrew acronym ( ra-m-ba-n , for r abbeinu m ōšeh b ēn- n āḥmān , '' our rabbi moses son of nahman '' ) . his catalan name was bonastruc ça porta ( also written saporta or de porta ) , literally '' mazel tov near the gate '' . biography . ramban was born in girona in 1194 , where he grew up and studied ( hence he is also called mosheh ben nahman gerondi , or '' moses son of nahman the gironan '' ) , and died in the land of israel about 1270 . bar ilan cd-rom he was a descendant of isaac ben reuben of barcelona and cousin of jonah gerondi ( rabbeinu yonah ) . encyclopaedia judaica second edition vol 14 pg 741 among his teachers in talmud were judah ben yakar and nathan ben meïr of trinquetaille , and he is said to have been instructed in kabbalah ( jewish mysticism ) by his countryman azriel of gerona , who was in turn a disciple of isaac the blind . according to the responsa of shlomo ibn aderet section 1 , responsa 120 and 167 nachmanides studied medicine . during his teens he began to get a reputation as a learned jewish scholar . at age 16 he began his writings on halakha . in his milhamot hashem ( wars of the lord ) he defended alfasi 's decisions against the criticisms of zerachiah ha-levi of girona . these writings reveal a conservative tendency that distinguished his later works — an unbounded respect for the earlier authorities . in the view of nachmanides , the wisdom of the rabbis of the mishnah and talmud , as well as the geonim ( rabbis of the early medieval era ) was unquestionable . their words were to be neither doubted nor criticized . '' we bow , '' he says , '' before them , and even when the reason for their words is not quite evident to us , we submit to them '' ( aseifat zekkenim , commentary on ketubot ) . nachmanides ' adherence to the words of the rishonim may be due to piety , or the influence of the northern french jewish school of thought . however , it is thought that it also may be a reaction to the rapid acceptance of greek philosophy among the jews of spain and provence ; this occurred soon after the appearance of maimonides ' guide for the perplexed . this work gave rise to a tendency to allegorize biblical narratives , and to downplay the role of miracles . against this tendency nachmanides strove , and went to the other extreme , not even allowing the utterances of the immediate disciples of the geonim to be questioned . . attitude toward maimonides . called upon , about 1238 , for support by solomon ben abraham of montpellier , who had been excommunicated by supporters of maimonides , nachmanides addressed a letter to the communities of aragon , navarre , and castile , in which solomon 's adversaries were severely rebuked . however , the great respect he professed for maimonides ( though he did not share the latter 's views ) , reinforced by innate gentleness of character , kept him from allying himself with the anti-maimonist party and led him to assume the role of a conciliator . in a letter addressed to the french rabbis , he draws attention to the virtues of maimonides and holds that maimonides ' mishneh torah – his code of jewish law – not only shows no leniency in interpreting prohibitions within jewish law , but may even be seen as more stringent , which in nachmanides ' eyes was a positive factor . as to maimonides ' guide for the perplexed , nachmanides stated that it was intended not for those of unshaken belief , but for those who had been led astray by the non-jewish philosophical works of aristotle and galen . ( note that nachmanides 's analysis of the guide is not the consensus view of modern scholars . ) '' if , '' he says , '' you were of the opinion that it was your duty to denounce the guide as heretical , why does a portion of your flock recede from the decision as if it regretted the step ? is it right in such important matters to act capriciously , to applaud the one to-day and the other tomorrow ? '' to reconcile the two parties , nachmanides proposed that the ban against the philosophical portion of maimonides 's code of jewish law should be revoked , but that the ban against the study of the guide for the perplexed , and against those who rejected allegorical interpretation of the bible , should be maintained and even strengthened . this compromise , which might have ended the struggle , was rejected by both parties in spite of nachmanides ' authority . . iggeret ha-kodesh . the book iggeret ha-kodesh ( אגרת הקודש - the holy epistle ) on the topics of marriage , holiness , and sexual relations was commonly attributed to nachmanides , who supposedly wrote it for his son as a wedding gift . however , modern scholarship attributes it to a different author , perhaps rabbi joseph ben abraham gikatilla . in this book , the author criticizes maimonides for stigmatizing man 's sexual nature as a disgrace to man . in the view of the author , the body with all its functions being the work of god , is holy , and so none of its normal sexual impulses and actions can be regarded as objectionable . views on death , mourning and the resurrection . in nachmanides 's torat ha-adam , which deals with mourning rites , burial customs , etc . , nachmanides sharply criticizes writers who strove to render man indifferent to both pleasure and pain . this , he declares , is against the law , which commands man to rejoice on the day of joy and weep on the day of mourning . the last chapter , entitled shaar ha-gemul , discusses reward and punishment , resurrection , and kindred subjects . it derides the presumption of the philosophers who pretend to a knowledge of the essence of god and the angels , while even the composition of their own bodies is a mystery to them . for nachmanides , divine revelation is the best guide in all these questions , and proceeds to give his views on jewish eschatology . he holds that as god is eminently just , there must be reward and punishment . this reward and punishment must take place in another world , for the good and evil of this world are relative and transitory . besides the animal soul , which is derived from the '' supreme powers '' and is common to all creatures , man possesses a special soul . this special soul , which is a direct emanation from god , existed before the creation of the world . through the medium of man it enters the material life ; and at the dissolution of its medium it either returns to its original source or enters the body of another man . this belief is , according to nachmanides , the basis of the levirate marriage , the child of which inherits not only the name of the brother of his fleshly father , but also his soul , and thus continues its existence on the earth . the resurrection spoken of by the prophets , which will take place after the coming of the messiah , is referred by nachmanides to the body . the physical body may , through the influence of the soul , transform itself into so pure an essence that it will become eternal . . commentary on the torah . ramban 's commentary on the torah ( five books of moses ) was his last work , and his most well known . he frequently cites and critiques rashi 's commentary , and provides alternative interpretations where he disagrees with rashi 's interpretation . he was prompted to record his commentary by three motives : ( 1 ) to satisfy the minds of students of the law and stimulate their interest by a critical examination of the text ; ( 2 ) to justify the ways of god and discover the hidden meanings of the words of scripture , '' for in the torah are hidden every wonder and every mystery , and in her treasures is sealed every beauty of wisdom '' ; ( 3 ) to soothe the minds of the students by simple explanations and pleasant words when they read the appointed sections of the pentateuch on sabbaths and festivals . his exposition , intermingled with aggadah and kabbalah interpretations , is based upon careful philology and original study of the bible . his commentary on the creation of the world describes the heavens and the earth being created out of a noncorporeal substance : as in his preceding works , he vehemently attacks the greek philosophy , especially aristotle , and frequently criticizes maimonides ' biblical interpretations . thus he assails maimonides ' interpretation of gen . 18:8 , in his '' ma'amar tehiyyat hametim '' ( '' treatise on resurrection '' ) , maimonides dismisses as '' utter fools '' anyone who believes that the three angels who visited abraham 's tent actually '' ate '' the '' curd , and milk , and the calf '' that abraham had prepared for them , despite the explicit language of the text . instead , maimonides takes a rationalist approach that , because angels are incorporeal , they do not consume food like ordinary man , and thus it only '' appeared '' that they were eating , or that abraham had a prophetic vision of the angels eating . see fred rosner , trans . , moses maimonides ' treatise on resurrection ( rowman & littlefield ed . 2004 ) , , p . 27 . asserting that maimonides ' preferred understanding is contrary to the evident meaning of the biblical words and that it is sinful even to hear it . while maimonides endeavored to reduce the miracles of the bible to the level of nature , nachmanides emphasizes them , declaring that '' no man can share in the torah of our teacher moses unless he believes that all our affairs , whether they concern masses or individuals , are miraculously controlled , and that nothing can be attributed to nature or the order of the world . '' see further on this debate under divine providence . next to belief in miracles nachmanides places three other beliefs , which are , according to him , the jewish principles of faith , namely , the belief in creationism , in the omniscience of god , and in divine providence . nachmanides , in this commentary , often fiercely criticized rabbi abraham ibn ezra , particularly regarding ibn ezra 's negative attitude towards kabbalah . nevertheless , he had tremendous respect for ibn ezra , as is evidenced in his introduction to the commentary . over time , nachmanides updated his commentary in at least 250 places , particularly after moving from spain to the land of israel . these updates are attested to in different versions of his commentary which survived in manuscript . . disputation of barcelona , 1263 . nachmanides , first as rabbi of girona and later as chief rabbi of catalonia , seems to have led a largely untroubled life . when well advanced in years , however , his life was interrupted by an event which made him leave his family and his country and wander in foreign lands . this was the religious disputation in which he was called upon to defend his faith in 1263 . the debate was initiated by a pablo christiani , a jewish convert to christianity , who had been sent by the dominican master general , raymond de penyafort , to king james i of aragon , with the request that the king order ramban to respond to charges against judaism . pablo christiani had been trying to make the jews convert to christianity . relying upon the reserve his adversary would be forced to exercise due to fear of offending the feelings of the christians , pablo assured the king that he would prove the truth of christianity from the talmud and other rabbinical writings . ramban answered the order of the king , but asked that complete freedom of speech should be granted . for four days ( july 20–24 ) he debated with pablo christiani in the presence of the king , the court , and many churchmen . the subjects discussed were : whether the messiah had appeared ; whether the messiah announced by the prophets was to be considered as divine or as a man born of human parents whether the jews or the christians were in possession of the true faith . christiani argued , based upon several aggadah passages , that the pharisee sages believed that the messiah had lived during the talmudic period , and that they ostensibly believed that the messiah was therefore jesus . nachmanides countered that christiani 's interpretations were distortions ; the rabbis would not hint that jesus was messiah while , at the same time , explicitly opposing him as such . he further said that if the sages of the talmud believed that jesus was the messiah then most certainly they would have been christians and not jews , and the fact that the sages of the talmud were jews is beyond dispute . nachmanides proceeded to provide context for the proof-texts cited by christiani , showing that they were most clearly understood differently than as proposed by christiani . furthermore , nachmanides demonstrated from numerous biblical and talmudic sources that traditional jewish belief ran contrary to christiani 's postulates . nachmanides argued that the biblical prophets regarded the future messiah as a human , a person of flesh and blood , and not as divine , in the way that christians view jesus . he stated that their promises of a reign of universal peace and justice had not yet been fulfilled , that since the appearance of jesus , the world had been filled with violence and injustice , and that among all denominations the christians were the most warlike . . it seems most strange that . the creator of heaven and earth resorted to the womb of a certain jewish lady , grew there for nine months and was born as an infant , and afterwards grew up and was betrayed into the hands of his enemies who sentenced him to death and executed him , and that afterwards . he came to life and returned to his original place . the mind of a jew , or any other person , simply can not tolerate these assertions . you have listened all your life to the priests who have filled your brain and the marrow of your bones with this doctrine , and it has settled into you because of that accustomed habit . i would argue that if you were hearing these ideas for the first time , now , as a grown adult , you would never accept them . he noted that questions of the messiah were of less dogmatic importance to jews than most christians imagine . the reason given by him for this bold statement was that it was more meritorious for the jews to observe the precepts under a christian ruler , while in exile and suffering humiliation and abuse , than under the rule of the messiah , when every one would perforce act in accordance with the law . as the disputation seemed to turn in favor of nachmanides , the jews of barcelona , fearing the resentment of the dominicans , entreated him to discontinue ; but the king , whom nachmanides had acquainted with the apprehensions of the jews , desired him to proceed . the controversy was therefore resumed , and concluded in what was considered a complete victory for nachmanides , who was dismissed by the king with a gift of three hundred gold pieces as a mark of his respect . the king remarked that he had never encountered a man who , while yet being wrong , argued so well for his position . the dominicans , nevertheless , claimed the victory , and nachmanides felt obligated to publish the text of the debates . from this publication pablo selected certain passages which he construed as blasphemies against christianity and denounced to the head of his order , raymond of penyafort . a capital charge was then instituted , and a formal complaint against the work and its author was lodged with the king . james was obliged to entertain the charge , but , mistrusting the dominican court , called an extraordinary commission , and ordered that the proceedings be conducted in his presence . nachmanides admitted that he had stated many things against christianity , but he had written nothing which he had not used in his disputation in the presence of the king , who had granted him freedom of speech . the justness of his defense was recognized by the king and the commission , but to satisfy the dominicans , nachmanides was sentenced to exile for two years and his pamphlet was condemned to be burned . he may also have been fined , but this was lifted as a favor to benveniste ça porta , who according to some authorities graetz , geschichte der juden vol . vii , pp . & nbsp ; 440–441 ; chazan , barcelona and beyond , p . & nbsp ; 199 was nachmanides ' brother . the dominicans , however , found this punishment too mild and , through pope clement iv , they seem to have succeeded in turning the two years ' exile into perpetual banishment . other scholars mayer kayserling jqr review 8 , 1896 , p . & nbsp ; 494 believe that the identification of bonastruc ça porta with nachmanides is incorrect . if so , then there were actually two people who were found to be blasphemous in the same time period and location . in jerusalem . nachmanides left aragon and sojourned for three years somewhere in castille or in the southern part of the kingdom of france . in 1267 , seeking refuge from christian persecution in muslim lands , p . 73 in jonathan sacks ( 2005 ) to heal a fractured world : the ethics of responsibility . london : continuum he made aliyah to jerusalem . there he established a synagogue in the old city that exists until the present day , known as the ramban synagogue . his re-establishment of jewish communal life in jerusalem ( which had been interrupted by crusades repression ) is notable in that it marked the beginning of almost 700 consecutive jewish years in jerusalem until the 1948 arab–israeli war . nachmanides then settled at acre , where he was very active in spreading jewish learning , which was at that time very much neglected in the holy land . he gathered a circle of pupils around him , and people came in crowds , even from the district of the euphrates , to hear him . karaites were said to have attended his lectures , among them aaron ben joseph the elder , who later became one of the greatest karaite authorities ( although graetz writes that there is no veracity to that ) . it was to arouse the interest of the israeli jews in the exposition of the bible that nachmanides wrote the greatest of his works , the above-mentioned commentary on the torah . although surrounded by friends and pupils , nachmanides keenly felt the pangs of exile . '' i left my family , i forsook my house . there , with my sons and daughters , the sweet , dear children i brought up at my knees , i left also my soul . my heart and my eyes will dwell with them forever . '' during his three-year stay in the holy land , nachmanides maintained a correspondence with his native land , by means of which he endeavored to bring about a closer connection between judea and spain . shortly after his arrival in jerusalem , he addressed a letter to his son nahman , in which he described the desolation of the holy city , where there were at that time only two jewish inhabitants—brothers , dyers by trade . in a later letter from acre he counsels his son to cultivate humility , which he considers to be the first of virtues . in another , addressed to his second son , who occupied an official position at the castilian court , nachmanides recommends the recitation of the daily prayers and warns above all against immorality . . death and burial . nachmanides died in the holy land after having passed the age of seventy or seventy-six . different traditions suggest that he was buried in haifa , acre , hebron , or in the cave of the ramban in jerusalem . . works . nachmanides ' wrote glosses on the whole talmud , made compendiums of parts of jewish law , after the model of isaac alfasi . his major work on the talmud is referred to as chiddushei haramban . he often provides a different perspective on a variety of issues that are addressed by the tosefot . nachmanides ' known halakhic works are : mishpetei ha-cherem , the laws concerning excommunication , reproduced in kol bo hilkhot bedikkah , on the examination of the lungs of slaughtered animals , cited by shimshon ben tzemach duran in his yavin shemu'ah torat ha-adam , on the laws of mourning and burial ceremonies , in thirty chapters , the last of which , entitled sha'ar ha-gemul , deals with eschatology ( constantinople , 1519 , and frequently reprinted ) . nachmanides ' writings in the defense of simeon kayyara and alfasi also belong in the category of his talmudic and halachic works . these writings are : milhamot hashem , defending alfasi against the criticisms of zerachiah ha-levi of girona ( published with the '' alfasi '' , venice , 1552 ; frequently reprinted ; separate edition , berlin , 1759 ) sefer ha-zekhut , in defense of alfasi against the criticisms of abraham ben david ( rabad ; printed with abraham meldola 's shiv'ah 'enayim leghorn , 1745 ; under the title machaseh u-magen , venice , 1808 ) hassagot ( constantinople , 1510 ; frequently reprinted ) , in defense of simeon kayyara against the criticisms of maimonides ' sefer ha-mitzwoth ( book of precepts ) . his other works are : '' derashah '' , sermon delivered in the presence of the king of castile '' sefer ha-ge'ulah '' , or '' sefer ketz ha-ge'ulah '' , on the time of the arrival of the messiah ( in azariah dei rossi 's '' me'or 'enayim imre binah , '' ch . xliii . , and frequently reprinted ) '' iggeret ha-musar '' , ethical letter addressed to his son ( in the '' sefer ha-yir'ah , '' or '' iggeret ha-teshuvah , '' of jonah gerondi ) '' iggeret ha-chemdah '' , letter addressed to the french rabbis in defense of maimonides ( with the '' ta'alumot chokmah '' of joseph delmedigo ) '' vikkuach '' , religious controversy with pablo christiani ( in the '' milchamot chovah '' ) '' perush iyyov '' , commentary on job '' bi'ur '' or '' perush 'al ha-torah '' , commentary on the torah a collection of responsa commonly attributed to nahmanides was in fact written by his student shlomo ibn aderet . teshuvot harashba meyuchas leharamban ; see beit yosef 's introduction to the tur for a discussion of authorship