Severo Ochoa

education and early life . ochoa was born in luarca ( asturias ) , spain . his father was severo manuel ochoa , ( who he was named after ) , a lawyer and businessman , and his mother was carmen de albornoz . ochoa was the nephew of álvaro de albornoz ( president of the second spanish republic that was exiled , 1947–1951 ) , and a cousin of the poet and critic aurora de albornoz . his father died when ochoa was seven , and he and his mother moved to málaga , where he attended elementary school through high school . his interest in biology was stimulated by the publications of the spanish neurologist and nobel laureate santiago ramón y cajal . in 1923 , he went to the university of madrid medical school , where he hoped to work with cajal , but cajal retired . he studied with father pedro arrupe , and juan negrín was his teacher . negrín encouraged ochoa and another student , josé valdecasas , to isolate creatinine from urine . the two students succeeded and also developed a method to measure small levels of muscle creatinine . ochoa spent the summer of 1927 at university of glasgow working with d . noel paton on creatine metabolism and improving his english skills . he also refined the assay procedure further and upon returning to spain he and valdecasas submitted a paper describing the work to the journal of biological chemistry , where it was rapidly accepted , marking the beginning of ochoa 's biochemistry career . ochoa completed his undergraduate medical degree in the summer of 1929 and decide to go abroad again to gain further research experience . his creatine and creatinine work led to an invitation to join otto meyerhof 's laboratory at the kaiser wilhelm society in berlin-dahlem in 1929 . at that time the institute was a '' hot bed '' of the rapidly evolving discipline of biochemistry , and thus ochoa had the experience of meeting and interacting with scientists such as otto heinrich warburg , carl neuberg , einar lundsgaard , and fritz lipmann in addition to meyerhof who had received the nobel prize in physiology and medicine less than a decade earlier . in 1930 ochoa returned to madrid to complete research for his md thesis , which he defended that year . in 1931 , a newly minted md , he married carmen garcía cobián . they did not have any children . he then began postdoctoral study at the national institute for medical research in london , where he worked with henry hallett dale . his london research involved the enzyme glyoxalase and was an important departure in ochoa 's career in two respects . first , the work marked the beginning of ochoa 's lifelong interest in enzymes . second , the project was at the cutting edge of the rapidly evolving study of metabolism . . career and research . in 1933 the ochoas returned to madrid where he began to study glycolysis in heart muscle . within two years , he was offered the directorship of the physiology section in a newly created institute for medical research at the complutense university of madrid . unfortunately the appointment was made just as the spanish civil war erupted . ochoa decided that trying to perform research in such an environment would destroy forever his '' chances of becoming a scientist . '' thus , '' after much thought , my wife and i decided to leave spain . '' in september 1936 they began what he later called the '' wander years '' as they traveled from spain to germany , to england , and ultimately to the united states within a span of four years . singleton , r . jr . ( 2007 ) . '' ochoa , severo . '' in new dictionary of scientific biography , noretta koertge ( ed . ) , vol . 5 , pp . 305–12 . detroit : charles scribner 's sons . ochoa left spain and returned to meyerhof 's kaiser wilhelm institute for biology now relocated in heidelberg , where ochoa found a profoundly changed research focus . during his 1930 visit the laboratory work was '' classical physiology , '' which ochoa described as '' one could see muscles twitching everywhere '' . by 1936 meyerhof 's laboratory had become one of the world 's foremost biochemical facilities focused on processes such as glycolysis and fermentation . rather than studying muscles '' twitch , '' the lab was now purifying and characterizing the enzymes involved in muscle action and those involved in yeast fermentation . from then until 1938 , he held many positions and worked with many people at many places . for example , otto meyerhof appointed him guest research assistant at the max planck institute for medical research in heidelberg for one year . from 1938 until 1941 he was demonstrator and nuffield research assistant at the university of oxford . united states . ochoa then went to the united states , where he again held many positions at several universities . between 1940 and 1942 , ochoa worked for the faculty of medicine of washington university in st . louis . in 1942 he was appointed research associate in medicine at the new york university school of medicine and there subsequently became assistant professor of biochemistry ( 1945 ) , professor of pharmacology ( 1946 ) , professor of biochemistry ( 1954 ) , and chairman of the department of biochemistry . in 1956 , he became an american citizen . in 1959 , ochoa and arthur kornberg were awarded the nobel prize for physiology or medicine '' for their discovery of the mechanisms in the biological synthesis of rna and dna '' . ochoa continued research on protein synthesis and replication of rna virus until 1985 , when he returned to now democratic spain and gave advice to spanish science policy authorities . ochoa was also a recipient of u.s . national medal of science in 1978 . severo ochoa died in madrid , spain on 1 november 1993 . carmen garcía cobián ochoa had died in 1986 . long after his death , spanish actress sara montiel claimed that she and severo ochoa were involved in an ( unconfirmed ) romantic relationship in the 1950s , as stated in an interview in spanish newspaper el país : '' el gran amor de mi vida ha sido severo ochoa . pero fue un amor imposible . clandestino . estaba casado y , además , no pegaba que él estuviera investigando y yo haciendo películas '' . ( '' the great love of my life was severo ochoa . but it was an impossible love . clandestine . he was married , and besides , him doing research and me doing films was n't a good match . '' ) . legacy . a new research center outside madrid that was planned in the 1970s , was finally built and named after him , the centro de biología molecular severo ochoa . south of madrid , a hospital bears his name , as does the madrid metro station serving it , hospital severo ochoa . the asteroid 117435 severochoa is also named in his honor . in june 2011 , the united states postal service issued a stamp honouring him , as part of the american scientists collection , along with melvin calvin , asa gray , and maria goeppert-mayer . this was the third volume in the series . references . external links .