Tillandsia

description . they are perennial herbaceous plants which exhibit a multitude of physiological and morphological differences making this a diverse genus . having native habitats that vary from being epiphytic and saxicolous , species have certain adaptations , such as root systems designed to anchor to other plants or substrates , and modified trichomes for water and nutrient intake . some of the species , like the majority of bromeliaceae , grow as funnel bromeliads , with a compressed stem axis . the leaves are then close together in rosettes , and cover the lower areas of the leaves , forming a funnel for collecting water . mendoza , c . , granados-aguilar , x . , donadío , s . , salazar , g . , flores-cruz , m . , hágsater , e . , starr , j . , ibarra-manríquez , g . , fragoso-martínez , i . , magallón , s . march 2017 . geographic structure in two highly diverse lineages of tillandsia ( bromeliaceae ) . these leaf rosettes , a common physical characteristic in tillandsia species , collect nutrients and water . the flowers typically involve bright , vibrant colors , with blooms or inflorescence produced on a stalk or several stalks . steens andrew ( 2003 ) ; bromeliads for the contemporary garden , timber press , portland , usa . the flower 's color varies greatly ; red , yellow , purple and pink flowers exist in this genus , and multicolored flowers are known . the bright colors attract pollinators . an air plant 's foliage may also change color when it blooms , also attracting pollinators . the hermaphrodite flowers are threefold with double perianth . the three free sepals are symmetrical and pointed . the seeds have a '' parachute '' similar to the dandelion . lyman b . smith , rj downs : tillandsioideae ( bromeliaceae ) . in : flora neotropica , vol . 14 , 2 , 1979 , p . 665 . common pollinators of this genera include moths , hummingbirds and , more recently recognized , bats . aguilar-rodríguez , p . , macswiney , c . , krömer , t . , garcía-franco , j . , knauer , a . , kessler , m . march 2014 . first record of bat-pollination in the species-rich genus tillandsia ( bromeliaceae ) . annals of botany . vol . 113 ( 6 ) pp . 1047–1055 . . range . they have naturally been established in diverse environments such as equatorial tropical rain forests , high elevation andes mountains , rock dwelling ( saxicolous ) regions , and louisiana swamps , such as spanish moss ( t . usneoides ) , a species that grows atop tree limbs . but there are also species that live lithophytic , so on rocks ( but also roofs and even telephone wires ) . the green species with their claim to a cool-humid climate live mostly more in the shade terrestrial or in the lower levels of the forests . rauh werner ( 1970 vol.1 , 1973 , vol.2 ) ; bromelien , verlag eugen ulmer , stuttgart . / bromeliads ( english translation , 1979 ) , blandford press . ( ) in contrast , almost all gray species live in precipitation-poor areas with high humidity . they prefer the full sun and can therefore be found in the upper floors of the woods , on rocks or ( rarely ) on the ground . many of the gray species are epiphytes . some species are more or less xeromorphic . elvira groß : beautiful tillandsien . ulmer , stuttgart 1992 , . cultivation . tillandsias , like other bromeliads , can multiply through pollination and seed formation . since tillandsia are not self-fertile , the pollen must come from another plant of the same species . tillandsia , depending on the species , may take months or years to flower . after flowering , the plant forms offsets and dies . elvira groß : tillandsia for room and conservatory . ulmer , stuttgart 2001 , generally , the thinner-leafed varieties grow in rainy areas and the thick-leafed varieties in areas more subject to drought . most species absorb moisture and nutrients through the leaves from rain , dew , dust , decaying leaves and insect matter , aided by structures called trichomes . steens andrew ( 2007 ) ; bromeliads connoisseur 's guide , random house , london . ( ) air plants are growing rapidly in popularity as a low maintenance household plant . due to their minimal root and other adaptations , they generally do not require frequent watering , no more than four times a week , allowing the plant to completely dry before watering again . wolfgang kawollek : tillandsien – species and culture . publisher naturbuch verlag © 1992 weltbildverlag gmbh augsburg the amount of light required depends on the species ; overall , air plants with silver dusting and stiff foliage will require more sunlight than air plants with softer foliage . they generally need a strong light . in summer outside , however , they prefer the light shade of a tree at the hottest hours . plants are commonly seen mounted , placed in a terrarium , or simply placed in seashells as decorative pieces . cuzenic stephan & lévêque daniel ( 2005 ) ; tillandsias and other bromeliads , eugen ulmer , paris . for so-called '' aerial '' species ( the majority of the common species in culture except tillandsia cyanea ) , that is to say those whose roots are transformed into crampons without any power of absorption , watering is done by the leaves in the form of frequent sprays , or brief soaking of the plant in a container full of water . it is imperative to use non-calcareous water . rainwater recovered from the flow of a mossy or green roof is best for this purpose , if available . instructions : care for air plants ( tillandsia ) . wedgewood gardens . available from : . ecology . species of tillandsia photosynthesis through a process called cam cycle , where they close their stomata during the day to prevent water loss and open them at night to fix carbon dioxide and release oxygen . this allows them to preserve water , necessary because they are epiphytes . they do not have a functional root system and instead absorb water in small amounts through their leaves via small structures called trichomes . species of tillandsia also absorb their nutrients from debris and dust in the air . any root system found on tillandsia has grown to act as a fragile stabilizing scaffold to grip the surface they grow on . as soon as they have been soaked with water , the green assimilation tissue below the suction scales becomes visible again , the plant is therefore '' greened '' . now the plant can absorb more light . when the sun dries the plants , they turn white . thanks to this special survival trick , plants without roots can absorb fog droplets as well as rainwater and thus cover their water needs . klaus labude : tillandsien . tetra publishing house , bissendorf wulften , 2002 , temperature is not critical , the range being from to . frost hardiness depends on the species . t . usneoides , for example , can tolerate night-time frosts down to about . for most species , the ideal growth temperature is between 20 °c and 25 °c , with a minimum of 10 °c and a maximum of 30 °c . few are resistant to −10 °c , but some , usually from higher elevation areas , are hardy enough to withstand light and brief freezes and live outdoors year round in areas with mild winters . . taxonomy . the genus tillandsia was named by carl linnaeus after the swedish physician and botanist dr . elias tillandz ( originally tillander ) ( 1640–1693 ) . some common types of tillandsia include ball moss ( t . recurvata ) and spanish moss ( t . usneoides ) . the genus contains around 650 species , where 635 are considered epiphytic mendoza , c . , granados-aguilar , x . , donadío , s . , salazar , g . , flores-cruz , m . , hágsater , e . , starr , j . , ibarra-manríquez , g . , fragoso-martínez , i . , magallón , s . march 2017 . geographic structure in two highly diverse lineages of tillandsia ( bromeliaceae ) . are traditionally divided into seven subgenus : tillandsia subg . allardtia ( a . dietr ) baker tillandsia subg . anoplophytum ( beer ) baker tillandsia subg . diaphoranthema ( beer ) baker tillandsia subg . phytarrhiza ( vis . ) baker tillandsia subg . pseudalcantarea mez tillandsia subg . pseudo-catopsis baker tillandsia subg . tillandsia four species are protected under cites ii : tillandsia harrisii tillandsia kammii tillandsia mauryana tillandsia xerographica . gallery . file : epífitas en los cables de la luz eléctrica.jpg tillandsia recurvata and another bromeliaceae species on electric wires near san juan de los morros , venezuela file : blushing bride airplant ( tillandsia ionantha ) . jpg tillandsia ionantha with bright-coloured foliage during full bloom . some foliage has a light , silver dusting which can be easily scratched off . file : tillandsia schiedeana mhnt.bot.2007.40.37.jpg seeds of tillandsia schiedeana – mhnt file : t_ionantha_bloom.jpg tillandsia ionantha in bloom . file : bromeliacea tillandsia fasciculata swartz.jpg tillandsia fasciculata file : tillandsia funckiana 1.jpg tillandsia funckiana file : tillandsia-excelsa.jpg tillandsia excelsa , a green funnel bromeliad with green leaves and hanging inflorescence at the site file : 空氣鳳梨 20190405161625.jpg tillandsia . 2018 taichung world flora exposition , taiwan . file : 空氣鳳梨 20190409105748.jpg tillandsia . 2018 taichung world flora exposition , taiwan . file : 空氣鳳梨 20190409105920.jpg tillandsia . 2018 taichung world flora exposition , taiwan . file : 空氣鳳梨 20190409105943.jpg tillandsia . 2018 taichung world flora exposition , taiwan . file : tillandsia regnellii.jpg alt tillandsia regnellii brazil tillandsia regnellii brazil file : tillandsia kautskyi var2.jpg tillandsia kautskyi . references . external links .