Rebbe

terminology and origin . rebbe . the titles rebbe and rabbi are both derived from one hebrew word , which means '' ( my ) master/teacher/mentor '' , referring to teachers of torah or leaders of judaism . this is the way a student would address a master of torah . it was an honorific originally given to those who had smicha in the pharisees and talmudic era . the english word rabbi comes directly from this form . in yiddish , the word became reb-eh & mdash ; now commonly spelled rebbe & mdash ; or just reb . the word master רב literally means '' great one '' . the sages of the mishnah known as the tannaim , from the 1st and 2nd centuries of the common era , were known by the title rabbi ( for example , rabbi akiva and rabbi simeon bar yohai ) . rabbi yehuda hanasi , the leader of jewry in mishnaic times , was simply called rabbi , as being the rabbi par excellence of his generation . the sages of the talmud known as the amoraim , from the 3rd , 4th and early 5th centuries , those born in the land of israel , are called rabbi ; those born in the diaspora are known by the title rav . usage . today , rebbe is used in the following ways : rabbi , a teacher of torah – yeshiva students or cheder ( elementary school ) students , when talking to their teacher , would address him with the honorific rebbe , as the yiddish-german equivalent to the hebrew word rabbi . personal mentor and teacher—a person 's main rosh yeshiva , yeshiva teacher , or mentor , who teaches him or her talmud and torah and gives religious guidance , is referred to as rebbe , oxford dictionary of english , merriam-webster 's collegiate dictionary also as an equivalent to the term '' rabbi '' . spiritual leader—the spiritual head of a hasidic movement is called a rebbe . his followers would address him as '' the rebbe '' or refer to him when speaking to others as '' the rebbe '' or '' my rebbe '' . he is referred to by others as the rebbe of a particular hasidic dynasty . in hebrew , a hasidic rebbe is often referred to as an admor , which is an abbreviation for adoneinu , moreinu , verabbenu ( '' our master , our teacher , and our rabbi '' ) . in writing , this title is placed before the name of the hasidut , as in '' admor of belz '' ; while the title rebbe comes after the name of the hasidut when used as an adjective , as in '' lubavitcher rebbe '' , '' amshinever rebbe '' , and every rebbe of every hasidic dynasty . in the litvishe world , when not referring to a hasidic rebbe ) , the word can be pronounced '' rebbee '' . sephardic jews can pronounce it as '' ribbi '' . the lubavitcher hasidim have a tradition that the hebrew letters that make up the word rebbe are also an acronym for '' rosh bnei yisroel '' , meaning '' a spiritual head of the children of israel '' . an ordinary communal rabbi , or rebbe in yiddish , is sometimes distinct from a rav , also pronounced rov by jews of eastern european or russian origin ) , who is a more authoritative halakha decider . a significant function of a rav is to answer questions of halakha ( corpus of jewish law ) , but he is not as authoritative as a posek . the short form reb is an honorific for orthodox jewish men , who are most likely to have profound knowledge of the talmud and torah , as opposed to reconstructionist , reform or conservative judaism . originally , this title was added to the names of jews at the time of the schism with the karaite sect , as a sign of loyalty to the original rabbinic judaism , known today as orthodox judaism . rabbi shlomo zalman auerbach , halikhot shlomo 1:370–373 ; salo wittmayer baron , a social and religious history of the jews , vol . 5 p . 283 . hasidism . as a rule , among hasidim , rebbe is referred to in hebrew as admor ( pl . admorim ) , an abbreviation for hebrew adoneinu moreinu v'rabeinu acronym for אדוננו מורנו ורבנו ) , meaning 'our master , our teacher , and our rabbi ' , which is now the modern hebrew word in israel for rebbe . hasidim use the term rebbe also in a more elevated manner , to denote someone that they perceive not only as the religious leader or nasi of their congregation , but as their spiritual adviser and mentor . the rebbe or my rebbe in this sense is a rav or rabbi whose views and advice are accepted not only on issues of religious law and practice , but in all arenas of life , including political and social issues . sometimes a hasid has a rebbe as his spiritual guide and an additional rav for rulings on issues of halakha . hasidim use the concept of a ( non-hasidic ) rebbe in the simple sense of rabbi , as the yiddish-german equivalent to the hebrew word . for example : '' i will ask my rebbe , rabbi ploni ( so-and-so ) , for advice about this personal matter . '' . the hasidic rebbe . a hasidic rebbe is generally taken to mean a great leader of a hasidic dynasty , also referred to as '' grand rabbi '' in english or an admor , a hebrew acronym for adoneinu-moreinu-verabbeinu ( '' our lord/master , teacher , and rabbi '' ) . outside of hasidic circles , the term '' grand rabbi '' has been used to refer to a rabbi with a higher spiritual status . the practice became widespread in america in the early 1900s when hasidic rebbes began to emigrate to the united states , and was derived from the german grossrabbiner . rabbi israel ben eliezer , the founder of hasidism , is regarded by hasidim as the first hasidic rebbe . during his lifetime he was referred to mainly as '' the holy '' rather than as '' rebbe '' , and his disciples were '' maggid '' or '' preachers '' , such as the mordechai twersky or the magid of mezritsh . the first '' rebbe '' to be known as such was the baal shem tov 's grandson , rabbi boruch of mezhibozh , who was referred to as '' the rebbe '' during his lifetime . after him , those who rose to positions of leadership and their successors began to be called rebbe . the title gradually came to suggest a higher spiritual status . each hasidic group refers to its leader as '' the rebbe '' . hannah rachel verbermacher , also known as the maiden of ludmir or the '' ludmirer moyd '' , was the only female rebbe in the history of the hasidic movement ; she lived in the 19th century in ukraine and israel . . relationship of hasidim to their rebbe . . rebbe as tzadik . according to maimonides , tractate yevamot of the babylonian talmud 49b–50a : '' one whose merit surpasses his iniquity is a tzadik '' . mishneh torah , sefer madda , laws of repentance 3:1 a tzadik is '' one whose merit surpasses his/her iniquity '' , and every person can reach the level of a tzadik . according to the tanya , a tzadik has no evil inclination , and only a select few predestined to attain this level can attain it . according to kabbalah ( and particularly the hasidic understanding of kabbalah ) , the world is sustained on the '' shoulders '' of tzadikim nistarim , divinely predestined exceptionally righteous people in a generation . nobody has knowledge about who was such a tzaddik , even one of these exceptionally righteous people would not know that they really are such a tzadik . these people are understood to have perfected their personal service of god to such an extent that they become literally and physically aware of god . these righteous people 's perception ( of both spiritual and physical , not to mention temporal matters ) transcends the apparent boundaries of existence . however , a hasidic rebbe is generally said to be a righteous person , called a '' tzaddik '' . furthermore , a rebbe is said to be able to affect divine providence , and a rebbe is said to be able to '' see the future '' , or at least have strong insight into the life and trials of another . as a result , hasidim in some hasidic circles seek their rebbe 's advice for a variety of concerns : spiritual , physical , and even business concerns . furthermore , many people seek the blessing ( bracha ) of a rebbe ( and a hasid will specifically seek the blessing of his own rebbe ) for anything , from minor ( and all the more so major ) physical troubles , to grand spiritual concerns . many famous and common stories of a rebbe 's intervention involve women who successfully seek a rebbe 's blessing for fertility so that they can conceive after having been barren for many years . tzadik hador . in some movements the hasidim believe that their rebbe is the '' tzadik hador '' ( tzaddik of the generation ) and would regard any thought that detracts from his perfection and holiness as heresy . other sects lessen this idealization to some degree or another . since many rebbes are sons-in-law or students of other rebbes , it makes sense that they would view themselves as subordinate to those other rebbes . nonetheless , their hasidim remain loyal to them because of their special loyalty , a family connection , or a belief that a specific tzaddik or nasi hador ( although others might have greater spiritual stature ) connects best with one 's soul . for example , the kosover rebbe makes yearly pilgrimages to the tosher rebbe . nonetheless , his followers remain very loyal to him . rebbe as conduit . unlike rabbis or non-hasidic rebbes in other jewish movements , hasidic judaism considers a '' hasidic rebbe '' to be a conduit between jews and god . on the basis of traditional kabbalistic concepts and terminology , hasidic philosophy bridged deveikut , a jewish concept referring to closeness to god , to the hasidic rebbe , embodying and channeling the divine flow of blessing to the world , because creation is dependent on the continuous flow of divine lifeforce , without which it would revert to nothingness . god and the zaddik as the two focal points of hasidic worship ada rapoport-albert , in essential papers on hasidism edited by gershon hundert , nyu press 1991 . hasidic followers of a rebbe . given a rebbe 's physical awareness of god , and the rebbe 's transcendent perception of godliness , many hasidim take special care to observe the specific and sometimes minute practices of their rebbe . even things that seem mundane may nonetheless be seen by hasidim as incredibly significant . for example , chabader hasidim frequently shape their fedoras to match the way that the lubavitcher rebbe shaped his hat-which was more flat than many others . many skverer hasidim ( of the skverer rebbe in new square ) wear their peyos identical to those of the skverer rebbe . while hasidim do not always follow the specific practices of their rebbe , the rebbe is able to create practices that may be specific and unique to his hasidim . for example , rabbi aaron roth ( reb areleh , as he was called ) the first rebbe of toldos aharon , told his hasidim to pause frequently while eating their meals in order to keep them from overindulging . a hasid will usually love his rebbe like a close family member , if not more so . the degree and nature of this belief varies , however , depending on the movement . functions of a hasidic rebbe . there are some functions which are exclusively the domain of hasidic rebbes : a rebbe conducts a tish : feert tish , literally , '' to run a table '' ) or a farbrengen—a communal festive meal with highly mystical overtones—on shabbat and other occasions . at a tish , the rebbe distributes shirayim ( lit . remnants ) to the hasidim seated at or gathered round the table . when a gathering similar to a tish is led by a rabbi who is not a rebbe ( i.e . a mashpia ) , it can be referred to as a botte ( esp . amongst groups from romania ) or sheves achim . a rebbe has times when hasidim ( and other petitioners ) may come for a private audience . a kvitel ( yiddish for '' note '' , plural kvitlach ) is a note with the name of the petitioner and a short request for which the rebbe is asked to pray . the formula in which a person 's name is written is one 's own hebrew name , the son/daughter of one 's mother 's hebrew name , such as shimon ben rivkah ( simeon the son of rebecca ) . hasidim believe that rebbes read supernaturally '' between the lines '' of a kvitel , and in every hasidic movement there are numerous anecdotes relating how the rebbe saw things that were not written in the kvitel . in most hasidic groups , the kvitel is written by the rebbe 's gabbai ( secretary ) , however sometimes the petitioner writes it on his own . usually , but with some exceptions , a pidyon ( redemption ) of cash is customarily handed to the rebbe under the kvitel , but this is not obligatory . this is considered to be the conduit through which the blessing is given , and a redemption for the soul of the petitioner . ( '' a gift makes its receiver glad '' is given as an explanation : a blessing only comes from a joyous heart . ) it is also customary to tip the gabbai , although this too is not obligatory . others are not exclusive to hasidic rebbes , but are often an important part of their role : participating in family celebrations of the hasidim , such as weddings and brisim ( circumcision ceremony ) performing mitzvos , etc . in the presence of their hasidim , such as kindling the chanuka lights and drawing water with which to bake matzos leading the prayers on shabbos , holy days , and other special occasions delivering learned or inspirational discourses ( in chabad hasidut , this is one of the main roles of a rebbe ) build educational , social and religious institutions