Passivation (chemistry)

mechanisms . there has been much interest in determining the mechanisms that govern the increase of thickness of the oxide layer over time . some of the important factors are the volume of oxide relative to the volume of the parent metal , the mechanism of oxygen diffusion through the metal oxide to the parent metal , and the relative chemical potential of the oxide . boundaries between micro grains , if the oxide layer is crystalline , form an important pathway for oxygen to reach the unoxidized metal below . for this reason , glass oxide coatings – which lack grain boundaries – can retard oxidation . fehlner , francis p , ref.3 . the conditions necessary , but not sufficient for passivation are recorded in pourbaix diagrams . some corrosion inhibitors help the formation of a passivation layer on the surface of the metals to which they are applied . some compounds , dissolved in solutions ( chromates , molybdates ) form non-reactive and low solubility films on metal surfaces . history . discovery . in the mid 1800s , christian friedrich schönbein discovered that when a piece of iron is placed in dilute nitric acid , it will dissolve and produce hydrogen , but if the iron is placed in concentrated nitric acid and then returned to the dilute nitric acid , little or no reaction will take place . schönbein named the first state the active condition and the second the passive condition . if passive iron is touched by active iron , it becomes active again . in 1920 , ralph s . lillie measured the effect of an active piece of iron touching a passive iron wire and found that '' a wave of activation sweeps rapidly ( at some hundred centimeters a second ) over its whole length '' . . surface passivation . the surface passivation process , also known as the atalla passivation technique , was developed by mohamed m . atalla at bell telephone laboratories ( btl ) in the late 1950s . in 1955 , carl frosch and lincoln derick at bell telephone laboratories ( btl ) accidentally discovered that silicon dioxide ( sio 2 ) could be grown on silicon . they showed that oxide layer prevented certain dopants into the silicon wafer , while allowing for others , thus discovering the passivating effect of oxidation on the semiconductor surface . in the late 1950s , atalla further discovered that the formation of a thermally grown sio 2 layer greatly reduced the concentration of surface states , and discovered the important quality of sio 2 films to preserve the electrical characteristics of p–n junctions and prevent these electrical characteristics from deteriorating by the gaseous ambient environment . he found that silicon oxide layers could be used to electrically stabilize silicon surfaces . j.r . ligenza and w.g . spitzer , who studied the mechanism of thermally grown oxides , managed to fabricate a high quality si/silicon dioxide stack , with atalla and kahng making use of their findings . atalla developed the surface passivation process , a new method of semiconductor device fabrication that involves coating a silicon wafer with an insulating layer of silicon oxide so that electricity could reliably penetrate to the conducting silicon below . by growing a layer of silicon dioxide on top of a silicon wafer , atalla was able to overcome the surface states that prevented electricity from reaching the semiconducting layer . for the surface passivation process , he developed the method of thermal oxidation , which was a breakthrough in silicon semiconductor technology . before the invention of the integrated circuit , discrete diodes and transistors exhibited relatively high reverse bias junction leakages and low breakdown voltage , caused by the large density of traps at the surface of single crystal silicon . atalla 's surface passivation process became the solution to this problem . he discovered that when a thin layer of silicon dioxide was grown on the surface of silicon where a p–n junction intercepts the surface , the leakage current of the junction was reduced by a factor from 10 to 100 . this showed that the oxide reduces and stabilizes many of the interface and oxide traps . oxide-passivation of silicon surfaces allowed diodes and transistors to be fabricated with significantly improved device characteristics , while the leakage path along the surface of the silicon was also effectively shut off . this became one of the fundamental isolation capabilities necessary for planar process and integrated circuit chips . atalla first published his findings in btl memos during 1957 , before presenting his work at an electrochemical society meeting in 1958 . the same year , he made further refinements to the process with his colleagues e . tannenbaum and e.j . scheibner , before they published their results in may 1959 . according to fairchild semiconductor engineer chih-tang sah , the surface passivation process developed by atalla 's team '' blazed the trail '' that led to the development of the silicon integrated circuit . atalla 's surface passivation method was the basis for several important inventions in 1959 : the mosfet ( mos transistor ) by atalla and dawon kahng at bell labs , the planar process by jean hoerni at fairchild semiconductor , and the monolithic integrated circuit chip by robert noyce at fairchild in 1959 . by the mid-1960s , atalla 's process for oxidized silicon surfaces was used to fabricate virtually all integrated circuits and silicon devices . in solar cell technology , surface passivation is critical to solar cell efficiency . in carbon quantum dot ( cqd ) technology , cqds are small carbon nanoparticles ( less than 10 & nbsp ; nm in size ) with some form of surface passivation . . specific materials . aluminium . aluminium naturally forms a thin surface layer of aluminium oxide on contact with oxygen in the atmosphere through a process called oxidation , which creates a physical barrier to corrosion or further oxidation in many environments . some aluminium alloys , however , do not form the oxide layer well , and thus are not protected against corrosion . there are methods to enhance the formation of the oxide layer for certain alloys . for example , prior to storing hydrogen peroxide in an aluminium container , the container can be passivated by rinsing it with a dilute solution of nitric acid and peroxide alternating with deionized water . the nitric acid and peroxide mixture oxidizes and dissolves any impurities on the inner surface of the container , and the deionized water rinses away the acid and oxidized impurities . aluminum passivation generally , there are two main ways to passivate aluminium alloys ( not counting plating , painting , and other barrier coatings ) : chromate conversion coating and anodizing . alclading , which metallurgically bonds thin layers of pure aluminium or alloy to different base aluminium alloy , is not strictly passivation of the base alloy . however , the aluminium layer clad on is designed to spontaneously develop the oxide layer and thus protect the base alloy . chromate conversion coating converts the surface aluminium to an aluminium chromate coating in the range of in thickness . aluminium chromate conversion coatings are amorphous in structure with a gel-like composition hydrated with water . chemical conversion coating on aluminum chromate conversion is a common way of passivating not only aluminium , but also zinc , cadmium , copper , silver , magnesium , and tin alloys . anodizing is an electrolytic process that forms a thicker oxide layer . the anodic coating consists of hydrated aluminium oxide and is considered resistant to corrosion and abrasion . aluminum anodizing process this finish is more robust than the other processes and also provides electrical insulation , which the other two processes may not . ferrous materials . ferrous materials , including steel , may be somewhat protected by promoting oxidation ( '' rust '' ) and then converting the oxidation to a metalophosphate by using phosphoric acid and further protected by surface coating . as the uncoated surface is water-soluble , a preferred method is to form manganese or zinc compounds by a process commonly known as parkerizing or phosphate conversion . older , less-effective but chemically-similar electrochemical conversion coatings included black oxide , historically known as bluing or browning . ordinary steel forms a passivating layer in alkali environments , as reinforcing bar does in concrete . stainless steel . stainless steels are corrosion-resistant , but they are not completely impervious to rusting . one common mode of corrosion in corrosion-resistant steels is when small spots on the surface begin to rust because grain boundaries or embedded bits of foreign matter ( such as grinding swarf ) allow water molecules to oxidize some of the iron in those spots despite the alloying chromium . this is called rouging . some grades of stainless steel are especially resistant to rouging ; parts made from them may therefore forgo any passivation step , depending on engineering decisions . common among all of the different specifications and types are the following steps : prior to passivation , the object must be cleaned of any contaminants and generally must undergo a validating test to prove that the surface is 'clean . ' the object is then placed in an acidic passivating bath that meets the temperature and chemical requirements of the method and type specified between customer and vendor . ( temperatures can range from ambient to 60 degrees c , or 140 degrees f , while minimum passivation times are usually 20 to 30 minutes ) . the parts are neutralized using a bath of aqueous sodium hydroxide , then rinsed with clean water and dried . the passive surface is validated using humidity , elevated temperature , a rusting agent ( salt spray ) , or some combination of the three . however , proprietary passivation processes exist for martensitic stainless steel , which is difficult to passivate , as microscopic discontinuities can form in the surface of a machined part during passivation in a typical nitric acid bath . the passivation process removes exogenous iron , creates/restores a passive oxide layer that prevents further oxidation ( rust ) , and cleans the parts of dirt , scale , or other welding-generated compounds ( e.g . oxides ) . passivation processes are generally controlled by industry standards , the most prevalent among them today being astm a 967 and ams 2700 . these industry standards generally list several passivation processes that can be used , with the choice of specific method left to the customer and vendor . the '' method '' is either a nitric acid-based passivating bath , or a citric acid-based bath , these acids remove surface iron and rust , while sparing the chromium . the various 'types ' listed under each method refer to differences in acid bath temperature and concentration . sodium dichromate is often required as an additive to oxidise the chromium in certain 'types ' of nitric-based acid baths , however this chemical is highly toxic . with citric acid , simply rinsing and drying the part and allowing the air to oxidise it , or in some cases the application of other chemicals , is used to perform the passivation of the surface . it is not uncommon for some aerospace manufacturers to have additional guidelines and regulations when passivating their products that exceed the national standard . often , these requirements will be cascaded down using nadcap or some other accreditation system . various testing methods are available to determine the passivation ( or passive state ) of stainless steel . the most common methods for validating the passivity of a part is some combination of high humidity and heat for a period of time , intended to induce rusting . electro-chemical testers can also be utilized to commercially verify passivation . nickel . nickel can be used for handling elemental fluorine , owing to the formation of a passivation layer of nickel fluoride . this fact is useful in water treatment and sewage treatment applications . silicon . in the area of microelectronics and photovoltaics surface passivation is usually implemented by oxidation to a coating of silicon dioxide . the effect of passivation on the efficiency of solar cells ranges from 3-7 % . passivation is effected by thermal oxidation at 1000 °c . the surface resistivity is high , > 100 ωcm . . see also . cold welding deal-grove model dental implant pilling–bedworth ratio . references . further reading . chromate conversion coating ( chemical film ) per mil-dtl-5541f for aluminium and aluminium alloy parts a standard overview on black oxide coatings is provided in mil-hdbk-205 , phosphate & black oxide coating of ferrous metals . many of the specifics of black oxide coatings may be found in mil-dtl-13924 ( formerly mil-c-13924 ) . this mil-spec document additionally identifies various classes of black oxide coatings , for use in a variety of purposes for protecting ferrous metals against rust . passivisation : debate over paintability