Christian music industry

history . the contemporary christian music industry has roots in the late 1960s and early 1970s jesus movement and its jesus music artists . the encyclopedia of contemporary christian music points out three reasons that the christian music industry developed as a parallel structure to the general music industry . first , the jesus movement produced a large number of bands in a very short period , which the general market was unable and/or unwilling to absorb . this was in part due to a lack of appreciation for the ideology expressed by such artists . finally , jesus music artists tended toward mistrust of secular corporations . according to another critic , the industry in this period was defined by four characteristics : lack of audience acceptance for styles , inferior production , inefficient distribution , and lack of wide radio exposure . petra , for instance , struggled to find an audience for their hard rock sound , partially due to limited distribution to christian bookstores . even so , the 1970s saw established corporations become involved in the christian music market . word records , founded in 1951 , was bought in 1976 by abc . other music industry giants also got involved , cbs started a short-lived christian label , priority records , and mca also fielded a label , songbird records , for a time . while the jesus movement had ended by the 1980s , the christian music industry was maturing and transforming into a multimillion-dollar enterprise . the early 1980s saw an increase christian booksellers taking product , and an increase in sales followed , despite the recession . as a percentage of gross sales , christian music rose from 9 % in 1976 to 23 % in 1985 . by age to age amy grant had saturated the christian marketplace and made significant inroads into the general market . sandi patti and michael w . smith also gained influence within christian music , each playing significant roles in the development of the industry . harder forms of christian music , such as metal music , also began to gain acceptance . this is largely credited to stryper , who had begun making inroads into the general market by 1985 . still , rock and alternative acts faced a longer battle for acceptance than contemporary acts , as the form was opposed by prominent religious leaders such as jimmy swaggart and others on the christian right . while in 1981 total gospel music industry revenues were approximately 180 & nbsp ; million , only ten years later they would total 680 & nbsp ; million , according to ccm magazine . and 1972 's only visiting this planet became one of the most revered albums of all time in christian music . even so , norman became , according to ccm '' so far outside the mainstream that most of today 's christian music fans have no idea who larry norman is . '' the problem , as summed by one critic , was that the music was too religious for secular audience , while simultaneously too aggressive for religious audiences . one critic describes the situation , stating that for a band '' to be taken seriously outside the christian scene , a band must stay far , far away from that scene . '' mutemath , for instance sued their record label with the goal of removing their product from the christian market . their first release sold almost 30,000 copies , with '' bulk of sales coming from the christian market , '' according to billboard . the band had been placed in the christian market by their record label largely because their lead singer , paul meany , was previously with the band earthsuit , whose kaleidoscope superior was released on sparrow records . this caused the band to not get taken seriously by music critics , and by the release of mutemath ( album ) the band began expressing discontent with their situation . meany told tucson weekly '' . we began to see ourselves getting pigeonholed into this particular world that we were n't necessarily proud to be associated with . we 're not trying to preach through our music ; we do n't have some kind of evangelistic agenda with what we 're doing . you know , you do n't want to be ashamed of your faith and your beliefs , but you do n't want to be marketed by that , either . '' on the other hand , some artists operate solely within the '' ghetto '' of christian music , and find great success in doing so . downplayed religious content . an early christian record label , lamb & lion records ( founded by pat boone ) reported in 1978 that it was their goal to produce crossover artists , but they were limited by lack of distribution to the secular marketplace . both problems affected christian labels into the 1990s . '' since people do n't understand the term 'blood of christ , ' '' stated a manager for lamb & lion , '' . music that communicates must approach it another way . we 've got to present a subtle but sensitive christian message . '' lyrics with subdued religious content have become commonplace in the industry ; one critic points out that the secular hit '' spirit in the sky '' '' has more explicit religious references than do many recent christian radio hits . '' some critics have alleged that ccm often uses '' minimal direct theology , '' and promotes a '' jesus is my boyfriend '' image of god . using downplayed religious content in lyrics has allowed some artists to '' cross over '' and make significant impact into the general market . some christian bands are able to do this while maintaining their identity in the christian market . for example , mercyme , whose double platinum album almost there produced the christian and secular chart hit '' i can only imagine . '' however , the lyrics of the single , while christian in nature , contain what one critic calls '' rather vacuous theology . '' sometimes '' crossing over '' creates ambiguity over whether an artist is christian ( a '' christian band '' ) , or the artist is composed of christians and produces music that appeals to christian music fans but does n't cater to the christian market ( '' christians in a band '' ) . such artists are : chevelle , whose point no . 1 was released to christian music markets , received three dove awards . however , the band is not generally considered to be a '' christian band '' today . on that topic the band states '' we originally signed with a record company that was backed by word ( a christian label housing john tesh and amy grant ) , so the record was in christian bookstores . it was really an accidental thing . '' project 86 has sometimes been labeled a '' christian band '' , although the band itself eschewed the label . the band considers its art to be the best conveyance of their message . frontman andrew schwab has offered several statements on the topic . '' we 're not going to go in there and say 'hey we 're the christian band . we 're going to carry ourselves like a normal band . hopefully people will like our music and investigate into the band . and they will learn our beliefs . '' '' if we 're playing at ozzfest or on family values . , '' the band told 7ball after the release of their second album , '' there is a greater level of tact necessary in order to reach that sort of audience . '' in a 2007 interview , schwab further opined '' we always tell people that the goal has been to just write music that we love , and write music hopefully that is challenging and inspiring to people and does n't sound like everything else out there . '' switchfoot is often referred to as a '' christian band '' , mostly due to their involvement with the christian rock scene in their early days . but the band has always shunned this label : '' for us , it 's a faith , not a genre , . '' says jon foreman . '' . these songs are for everyone . calling us 'christian rock ' tends to be a box that closes some people out and excludes them . and that 's not what we 're trying to do . music has always opened my mind—and that 's what we want '' . duly , foreman 's lyrics steer clear of preachiness , exclusive declarations of faith , or even any mention of jesus , instead social commentary , probing existential issues through '' socratic dialogue '' in which he answers questions with more questions , exploring frustrations , or simply being inspirational . even so , this position has not alienated their christian fans . as in their indie days , they are still distributed to christian retail outlets through sparrow records , featured on christian radio and charts , and presented dove awards , even after having been signed to the mainstream columbia records . spin writer andrew beaujon takes the view that '' their lyrics often have two different meanings , one meaning for a christian audience and one meaning for the rest of us . they try to relate to two different groups of people at once '' . . in video . the trend continues when examining religious videos . many christian bands produce videos with rotation on mtv in mind , however , the images can lead to an ambiguous impression of the portrayal . in 1982 mtv featured two videos , '' constantly changing '' and '' it 's mad '' ( which was the first one to be featured ) , made by the swedish christian rock band jerusalem to promote their 1981 release warrior . degarmo and key was the first christian band in the us whose video appeared on mtv , made a video for their single '' six , six , six '' off their 1984 release communication . while the video was shown on mtv for a short time , it was subsequently pulled for a scene which depicted the antichrist engulfed in flames , which mtv described as '' senseless violence . '' eventually the video was re-edited for mtv—however , the unedited version continued to play in christian bookstores and on christian television networks , like trinity broadcasting . the video received a dove award in a category created specially for it , '' gospel music visual song '' in 1985 . another artist , brian welch , whose solo debut was released to christian markets , found their album pulled from some christian bookstores after the music video for '' flush '' was released . the video is an interpretation of the authors personal experience with methamphetamine , before his religious conversion . at the time the album was pulled , brian welsh released a statement about the visual content of the video , relating its symbolism to his personal experiences of addiction and redemption . he also issued the following statement : '' the video for 'flush ' is about crystal meth addiction and the crazy things anyone addicted to meth will do while they 're high or to get their fix . everything the models were doing in the video is what i was wrapped up in while i was addicted to meth . i believe i would be dead right now if i continued using meth , but instead , i chose to surrender my life to christ and die to myself so he could share his resurrection with me . there is a huge message of hope on my cd and i believe those retailers that are pulling the cd from their shelves are robbing someone spiritually by taking it off of the shelves . '' a study of visual elements of christian music videos on z music television , a now defunct mtv-like channel for christian music , found that almost one third of the channel 's videos could be described as '' ambiguously religious '' at best ( red area , right ) . the conclusion was that the channel 's programming was designed to make its christian nature '' apparent only to those willing to listen for it . '' . other arguments . some critics describe the christian music industry as being committed '' to the goals and strategies of the commercial marketplace – industrial growth , increased market share , and greater profits . '' this became more apparent in the 1980s and 1990s as the largest christian record labels became subsidiaries of the '' mainstream '' labels ( who are themselves owned by huge media conglomerates like viacom and time warner ) . others see the industry as taking on the roles traditionally reserved for the church . concerts are the equivalent of religious services , and commodities symbols of faith . under these conditions '' evangelism becomes rhetoric—justifying the propaganda value of the industry 's work – not spiritual reality . '' one critic comments that '' perhaps the 'ghettoization ' and parallel institutionalism of ccm manifests itself nowhere more apparently than at numerous christian rock festivals . '' . see also . list of christian media organizations christian copyright licensing international gospel music association . references . sources . . original publication , 1990 , bowling green state university popular press . bowling green , ohio . . further reading original publication , 1999 , broadman & holman publishers . external links . industry organizations christian music trade association christian songwriter 's network other steve camp 's 107 thesis is christian music dying ?