Causantín mac Fergusa

life . it had been proposed that causantín and his brother óengus were sons of fergus mac echdach , king of dál riata , bannerman , pp . 83 & ndash ; 85 ; see also broun , '' pictish kings '' , p . 78 , for some of the other proposals . but this is no longer widely accepted . instead , it is thought they were kin to the first king óengus mac fergusa , perhaps grandsons or grandnephews . this family may have originated in circinn ( presumed to correspond with the modern mearns ) , and had with ties to the eóganachta of munster in ireland . broun , '' pictish kings '' , p . 82 , table 67 ; clancy , '' caustantín '' ; woolf , '' onuist '' . causantín 's reign falls in a period when irish annals have relatively few notices of events in scotland , possibly due to the failing of the annals believed to have been kept in scotland at iona and applecross . broun , '' pictish kings '' , p . 72 . perhaps for that reason , there are only two reports which mention him . other entries make it clear that the vikings were active in ireland and on the western coasts of scotland in this time , which may also account for the lack of records . iona was a target , and it may be that abbot noah of kingarth , on the isle of bute , was killed by raiders . noah 's death , probably by violence , is reported by the annals of ulster , s.a . 789 . entries relating to viking activity are found for 794 & ndash ; 796 , 798 , 802 , 806 , & c . the first report , in 789 , is the record of a battle in pictland between causantín and conall mac taidg , in which causantín was victorious . conall later reappears in kintyre , where was killed in 807 . annals of ulster , s.a . 788 . the dating is not certain as a second notice , s.a . 789 , says '' the battle of causantín and conall is written here in other books . '' it is not known whether causantín was king before defeating conall . the king lists give varying lengths for his reign , from 35 to 45 years , and are not to be relied upon without independent confirmation . essh , p . cxxvii ; broun , '' pictish kings '' , pp.82 & ndash ; 83 and note 29 . the second report is that of causantín 's death in 820 . annals of ulster , s.a . 819 . the annals of innisfallen , ai820.1 , call causantín '' king of alba '' , but this is not considered to be significant . the dupplin cross was long assumed to commemorate cináed mac ailpín 's final victory over the picts , as indeed , was sueno 's stone . recent analysis has revealed a small part of an inscription on the cross , in which causantín is named . accordingly , it is supposed that this monument was commissioned by him , or as a memorial to him . he appears there as , a latinisation derived from the old irish version of his name rather than the presumed pictish form castantin filius uurguist found in the poppleton manuscript and similar pictish king lists.image : martyrology of tallaght.jpg thumb left 120px the martyrology of tallaght ( university college dublin ms . a3 ) from the book of leinster , c . 1180 . it has been proposed that the st andrews sarcophagus was made for causantín , but this is a minority view , as is the suggestion that the relics of columba , perhaps including the monymusk reliquary , may have been translated from iona to dunkeld during causantín 's reign . broun , '' dunkeld '' , p . 105 , note 40 ; the idea that columba 's relics may have come to dunkeld in the time of causantín , rather than thirty years later in the time of cináed mac ailpín is based on an entry in the chronicon scotorum for 818 . cs 818 reads : '' diarmait , abbot of ia , went to scotland with the shrine of colum cille . '' however , a circuit with the relics of the saint may have been a regular occurrence . that causantín established dunkeld is stated by later chroniclers such as john of fordun who are following some variants of the pictish king lists or other materials now lost . andrew of wyntoun dates the foundation to 815 , although he states that this was after the deaths of charlemagne and pope leo iii , which would date it to 816 or later . fordun , iv , xii ; essh , p.262 . it is suggested that causantín is commemorated by the martyrology of tallaght , a product of one of the principal culdee monasteries of the day . as a patron of the céli dé , and perhaps a collaborator of abbot diarmait of iona , it is thought that causantín may have been a church reformer , in line with céli dé ideals . clancy , '' caustantín '' . caustantín appears also to have been a patron of the northumbrian monasteries , as he is commemorated , along with his nephew eogán , in the liber vitae dunelmensis , which contains a list of those for whom prayers were said , dating from around 840 . forsyth , p . 25 . causantín was succeeded by his brother óengus . his son drest was later king . causantín 's son domnall is believed to have been king of dál riata from around 811 until 835 . causantín 's reputation among the kings who followed him may , perhaps , be demonstrated by the use of his name on for three kings in the century and a half following his death when it is not attested as a kingly name in scotland prior to his reign . see also . house of óengus . notes . references . alan orr anderson , early sources of scottish history a.d 500 & ndash ; 1286 , volume 1 . reprinted with corrections , stamford : paul watkins , 1990 . bannerman , john . '' the scottish takeover of pictland and the relics of columba '' in dauvit broun and thomas owen clancy ( eds . ) spes scotorum : saint columba , iona and scotland . edinburgh : t & t clark , 1999 broun , dauvit , '' dunkeld and the origins of scottish identity '' in dauvit broun and thomas owen clancy ( eds ) , op . cit . broun , dauvit . '' pictish kings 761-839 : integration with dál riata or separate development '' in sally foster ( ed . ) the st andrews sarcophagus : a pictish masterpiece and its international connections . dublin : four courts press , 1998 . clancy , thomas owen . '' caustantín son of fergus ( uurgust ) '' in m . lynch ( ed . ) the oxford companion to scottish history . oxford & new york : oxford up , 2002 . john of fordun , chronicle of the scottish nation , ed . william forbes skene , tr . felix j.h . skene , 2 vols . reprinted , lampeter : llanerch press , 1993 . katherine forsyth , '' evidence of a lost pictish source in the historia regum anglorum of symeon of durham '' , in simon taylor ( ed . ) kings , clerics and chronicles in scotland , 500-1297 : essays in honour of marjorie ogilvie anderson on the occasion of her ninetieth birthday . dublin : four courts press , 2000 . sally foster , picts , gaels and scots : early historic scotland . london : batsford , smyth , alfred p . warlords and holy men : scotland ad 80-1000 . reprinted , edinburgh : edinburgh up , 1998 . external links . celt : corpus of electronic texts at university college cork includes the annals of ulster , tigernach , the four masters and innisfallen , the chronicon scotorum , the lebor bretnach ( which includes the duan albanach ) , genealogies , and various saints ' lives . most are translated into english , or translations are in progress . the martyrology of tallaght is not presently available . the pictish chronicle