German aircraft carrier Graf Zeppelin

design . graf zeppelin was long overall ; she had a beam of and a maximum draft of . at full combat load , she would have displaced . the ship 's propulsion system consisted of four brown , boveri & cie geared turbines with sixteen oil-fired , ultra-high-pressure lamont boilers . the power plant was rated at and a top speed of . graf zeppelin had a projected cruising radius of at a speed of . she would have had a crew of 1760 & nbsp ; officers and enlisted men , plus flight crews . gröner , p . 71 the ship 's primary offensive power would have been its aircraft complement . graf zeppelin would have carried 42 aircraft as designed : 12 navalized junkers ju 87 '' stuka '' dive bombers , 10 messerschmitt bf 109 fighters , and 20 fieseler fi 167 torpedo bombers . reynolds , p . 44 later during the construction process , the aerial complement was reworked to consist of thirty ju 87s and twelve bf 109s , and the fi 167s were removed altogether . as designed , graf zeppelin was to be fitted with eight 15 cm sk c/28 guns for defense against surface warships . this number was later increased to sixteen . her anti-aircraft battery consisted of ten 10.5 cm sk c/33 guns & mdash ; later increased to twelve & mdash ; twenty-two 3.7 cm sk c/30 guns , and twenty-eight 2 cm guns . the ship 's flight deck was protected with up to of wotan weich steel armor . a thick armored deck was located under the deck to protect the ship 's vitals from aerial attacks . graf zeppelin had a waterline armor belt that was thick in the central area of the ship . . construction and cancellation . on 16 november 1935 , the contract for flugzeugträger a ( aircraft carrier a ) & mdash ; later christened graf zeppelin & mdash ; was awarded to the deutsche werke shipyard in kiel . construction of the ship was delayed since deutsche werke was working at capacity , and the slipway needed for graf zeppelin was occupied by the new battleship , which was launched on 8 december 1936 . breyer , p . 11 work started on graf zeppelin on 28 december , when her keel was laid down . she was launched on 8 december 1938 , the 24th anniversary of the battle of the falkland islands , gardiner & chesneau , p . 226 and she was christened by helene von zeppelin , the daughter of the ship 's namesake . at the launching ceremony , hermann göring gave a speech . israel , pp . 67 & ndash ; 69 by the end of 1939 , she was 85 % complete , with a projected completion by the middle of 1940 . gardiner & chesneau , p . 227 by september 1939 , one carrier-borne wing , trägergruppe 186 , had been formed by the luftwaffe at kiel holtenau , composed of three squadrons equipped with bf 109s and ju 87s . whitley ( 1984 ) , p . 164 meanwhile , the german conquest of norway in april 1940 eroded any chance of completing graf zeppelin . now responsible for defending norway 's long coastline and numerous port facilities , the kriegsmarine urgently needed large numbers of coastal guns and anti-aircraft batteries . during a naval conference with hitler on 28 april 1940 , admiral erich raeder proposed halting all work on graf zeppelin , arguing that even if she was commissioned by the end of 1940 , final installation of her guns would need another ten months or more ( her original fire-control system had been sold to the soviet union under an earlier trade agreement ) . schenk , p . 143 hitler consented to the stop work order , allowing raeder to have graf zeppelins 15 & nbsp ; cm guns removed and transferred to norway . the carrier 's heavy flak gun of twelve 10.5 & nbsp ; cm guns had already been diverted elsewhere . whitley ( 1985 ) , p . 30 in july 1940 , graf zeppelin was towed from kiel to gotenhafen ( gdynia ) and remained there for nearly a year . while there , she was used as a storage depot for germany 's hardwood supply . gröner , p . 72 just before germany invaded the soviet union in june 1941 , the carrier was again moved , this time to stettin , to safeguard her from soviet air attacks . by november , the german army had pushed deep enough into russian territory to remove any further threat of air attack and graf zeppelin was returned to gotenhafen . there , she was used as a store ship for timber . schenk , p . 157 by the time raeder met with hitler for a detailed discussion of naval strategy in april 1942 , the usefulness of aircraft carriers in modern naval warfare had been amply demonstrated . british carriers had crippled the italian fleet at battle of taranto , critically damaged the in may 1941 and prevented battleship from attacking two convoys bound for russia in march 1942 . in addition , a japanese attack on pearl harbor had devastated the american battle fleet in december 1941 . raeder , anxious to secure air protection for the kriegsmarines heavier surface units , informed hitler that graf zeppelin could be finished in about a year , with another six months required for sea trials and flight training . on 13 may 1942 , with hitler 's authorization , the german naval supreme command ordered work resumed on the carrier . reynolds , p . 47 but daunting technical problems remained . raeder wanted newer planes , specifically designed for carrier use . reichsmarshall hermann göring , head of the luftwaffe , replied that the already overburdened german aircraft industry could not possibly complete the design , testing and mass production of such aircraft before 1946 . instead , he proposed converting existing aircraft ( again the junkers ju 87 and messerschmitt bf 109 ) as a temporary solution until newer types could be developed . training of carrier pilots at travemünde would also resume . the converted carrier aircraft were heavier versions of their land-based predecessors and this required a host of changes to graf zeppelins original design : the existing catapults needed modernization ; stronger winches were necessary for the arresting gear ; the flight deck , elevators and hangar floors also required reinforcement . barker , p . 283 changes in naval technology dictated other alterations as well : installation of air search radar sets and antennas ; upgraded radio equipment ; an armored fighter-director cabin mounted on the main mast ( which in turn meant a heavier , sturdier mast to accommodate the cabin 's added weight ) ; extra armoring for the bridge and fire control center ; a new curved funnel cap to shield the fighter-director cabin from smoke ; replacing the single-mount 20mm aa guns with quadruple flakvierling 38 guns ( with a corresponding increase in ammunition supply ) to improve overall aa defense ; and additional bulges on either side of the hull to preserve the ship 's stability under all this added weight . whitley ( 1985 ) , p . 31 the german naval staff hoped all these changes could be accomplished by april 1943 , with the carrier 's first sea trials taking place in august that year . towards that end , chief engineer wilhelm hadeler was reassigned to oversee graf zeppelins completion . hadeler planned on getting the two inner shafts and their respective propulsion systems operational first , giving the ship an initial speed of 25 & ndash ; 26 knots , fast enough for sea trials to commence and for conducting air training exercises . by the winter of 1943 & ndash ; 1944 she was expected to be combat-ready . on the night of 27–28 august 1942 , while still moored at gotenhafen , graf zeppelin was the target of the only allied air attack aimed at her during the war . three royal air force avro lancaster heavy bombers from 106 squadron were dispatched against the german aircraft carrier , each one carrying a single '' capital ship '' bomb , a device with a shaped charge warhead intended for armored targets . lake , p . 50 one pilot , who was unable to see the carrier due to haze , dropped his bomb instead on the estimated position of the . another believed he had scored a direct hit on graf zeppelin , but there is no known record of the ship suffering any damage from a bomb strike that night . marshall , p . 21 on 5 december 1942 , graf zeppelin was towed back to kiel and placed in a floating drydock . it seemed she might well see completion after all , but by late january 1943 hitler had become so disenchanted with the kriegsmarine , especially with what he perceived as the poor performance of its surface fleet , that he ordered all of its larger ships taken out of service and scrapped . raeder was shortly relieved of command and replaced with the commander of submarines karl dönitz . though admiral dönitz eventually persuaded hitler to void most of the order , work on all new surface ships and even those nearing completion , including graf zeppelin , was halted . mann & jörgensen , pp . 139–141 whitley ( 1985 ) , p . 32 on 30 january 1943 , all major work on the ship ceased , though some limited , temporary work continued until march . in april 1943 graf zeppelin was again towed eastward , first to gotenhafen , then to the roadstead at swinemünde and finally berthed at a back-water wharf in the parnitz river , two miles ( 3 & nbsp ; km ) from stettin , where she had been briefly docked in 1941 . there she languished for the next two years with only a 40-man skeleton crew in attendance . reynolds , p . 48 when red army forces neared the city in april 1945 , the ship 's kingston valves were opened , flooding her lower spaces and settling her firmly into the mud in shallow water . a ten-man engineering squad then rigged the vessel 's interior with demolition and depth charges in order to hole the hull and destroy vital machinery . at 6pm on 25 april 1945 , just as the soviets entered stettin , commander wolfgang kähler radioed the squad to detonate the explosives . smoke billowing from the carrier 's funnel confirmed the charges had gone off , rendering the ship useless to her new owners for many months to come . kuzin & litinskii , p . 161 . fate after the war . the carrier 's history and fate after germany 's surrender was unknown outside the soviet union for decades after the war . the soviets could not repair the ship in the length of time specified by the terms of the tripartite naval commission , so she was designated a '' category c '' ship . this classification required that she would be destroyed or sunk in deep water by 15 august 1946 . rohwer & monakov , p . 199 instead , the soviets decided to salvage the damaged ship and it was refloated in march 1946 . a number of speculations from western historians about the ship 's fate arose in the decades after the end of the war . according to german historian erich gröner , after the soviets raised the scuttled ship , they towed her to leningrad . while en route , she reportedly struck a mine off finland during a storm . after arriving in leningrad , graf zeppelin was broken up for scrap in 1948 & ndash ; 1949 . naval historians robert gardiner and roger chesneau state that the ship was towed out of stettin in september 1947 , but she never arrived in leningrad ; they speculated that a mine sank the ship while she was under tow . according to soviet records , on 19 march 1947 , the council of ministers decreed the destruction of former german ships . the first ship to be sunk , lützow , was sunk off swinemunde on 22 july 1947 . on 14 august graf zeppelin was towed into swinemunde harbor , and two days later to its final position . it was subjected to five series of controlled explosions of shells and fab series bombs . the first test imitated a fab-1000 detonation in the exhaust funnel and lesser bombs below the flight deck . the second in the series was a single fab-1000 explosion above the flight deck . the third , the fourth and the fifth series imitated penetration of fab-100 , fab-250 and fab-500 bombs at flight deck , hangar deck and gun battery deck levels . these bombs were placed in cutouts in their target decks to imitate the effects of dive bombing . graf zeppelin remained afloat , and admiral yury rall ordered a torpedo strike . a torpedo fired from an pt boat elco exploded in the anti-torpedo bulge but did not penetrate the belt armor . a torpedo fired by the destroyer penetrated the unprotected hull section below the bow elevator ; graf zeppelin sank 25 minutes later . shirokorad , pp . 108 & ndash ; 112 . . discovery in 2006 . the exact position of the wreck was unknown for decades . on 12 july 2006 , the research vessel , a ship belonging to the polish oil company petrobaltic , found a wreck north of władysławowo , which they thought was most likely graf zeppelin . the wreck rests at a depth of more than below the surface . after the wreck was located , the polish navy began a two-day survey of the wreckage to confirm its identity . using remote-controlled underwater robots , they concluded that they were '' 99 % certain '' it was graf zeppelin . . notes . footnotes . . citations . . references . . external links . launching ceremony of the graf zeppelin