Population bottleneck

minimum viable population size . in conservation biology , minimum viable population ( mvp ) size helps to determine the effective population size when a population is at risk for extinction . the effects of a population bottleneck often depend on the number of individuals remaining after the bottleneck and how that compares to the minimum viable population size . founder effects . a slightly different form of bottleneck can occur if a small group becomes reproductively ( e.g . geographically ) separated from the main population , such as through a founder event , e.g . if a few members of a species successfully colonize a new isolated island , or from small captive breeding programs such as animals at a zoo . alternatively , invasive species can undergo population bottlenecks through founder events when introduced into their invaded range . lee , c . e . ( 2002 ) . evolutionary genetics of invasive species . trends in ecology & evolution , 17 ( 8 ) , 386-391 . . examples . humans . according to a 1999 model , a severe population bottleneck , or more specifically a full-fledged speciation , occurred among a group of australopithecine as they transitioned into the species known as homo erectus two million years ago . it is believed that additional bottlenecks must have occurred since homo erectus started walking the earth , but current archaeological , paleontological , and genetic data are inadequate to give much reliable information about such conjectured bottlenecks . that said , the possibility of a severe recent species-wide bottleneck can not be ruled out . a 2005 study from rutgers university theorized that the pre-1492 native populations of the americas are the descendants of only 70 individuals who crossed the land bridge between asia and north america . . toba catastrophe theory . the controversial toba catastrophe theory , presented in the late 1990s to early 2000s , suggested that a bottleneck of the human population occurred approximately 75,000 years ago , proposing that the human population was reduced to perhaps 10,000–30,000 individuals when the toba supervolcano in indonesia erupted and triggered a major environmental change . parallel bottlenecks were proposed to exist among chimpanzees , gorillas , rhesus macaques , orangutans and tigers . the hypothesis was based on geological evidence of abrupt climate change and on coalescence evidence of some genes ( including mitochondrial dna , y-chromosome dna and some nuclear gene ) and the relatively low level of genetic variation in humans . however , subsequent research , especially in the 2010s , appeared to refute both the climate argument and the genetic argument . recent research shows the extent of climate change was much smaller than believed by proponents of the theory . genetic material inherited exclusively from either father or mother can be traced back in time via either matrilineal or patrilineal ancestry . in 2000 , a molecular biology and evolution paper suggested a transplanting model or a 'long bottleneck ' to account for the limited genetic variation , rather than a catastrophic environmental change . this would be consistent with suggestions that in sub-saharan africa numbers could have dropped at times as low as 2,000 , for perhaps as long as 100,000 years , before numbers began to expand again in the late stone age . . other animals . european bison , also called wisent ( bison bonasus ) , faced extinction in the early 20th century . the animals living today are all descended from 12 individuals and they have extremely low genetic variation , which may be beginning to affect the reproductive ability of bulls . the population of american bison ( bison bison ) fell due to overhunting , nearly leading to extinction around the year 1890 , though it has since begun to recover ( see table ) . left a classic example of a population bottleneck is that of the northern elephant seal , whose population fell to about 30 in the 1890s . although it now numbers in the hundreds of thousands , the potential for bottlenecks within colonies remains . dominant bulls are able to mate with the largest number of females — sometimes as many as 100 . with so much of a colony 's offspring descended from just one dominant male , genetic diversity is limited , making the species more vulnerable to diseases and genetic mutations . the golden hamster is a similarly bottlenecked species , with the vast majority of domesticated hamsters descended from a single litter found in the syrian desert around 1930 , and very few wild golden hamsters remaining . an extreme example of a population bottleneck is the new zealand black robin , of which every specimen today is a descendant of a single female , called old blue . the black robin population is still recovering from its low point of only five individuals in 1980 . the genome of the giant panda shows evidence of a severe bottleneck about 43,000 years ago . there is also evidence of at least one primate species , the golden snub-nosed monkey , that also suffered from a bottleneck around this time . an unknown environmental event is suspected to have caused the bottlenecks observed in both of these species . the bottlenecks likely caused the low genetic diversity observed in both species . other facts can sometimes be inferred from an observed population bottleneck . among the galápagos islands giant tortoises — themselves a prime example of a bottleneck — the comparatively large population on the slopes of the alcedo volcano is significantly less diverse than four other tortoise populations on the same island . dna analyses date the bottleneck to around 88,000 years before present ( ybp ) . about 100,000 ybp the volcano erupted violently , deeply burying much of the tortoise habitat in pumice and ash . before europeans arrived in north america , prairies served as habitats to greater prairie chickens . in illinois alone , the number of greater prairie chickens plummeted from over 100 million in 1900 to about 50 in 1990 . these declines in population were the result of hunting and habitat destruction , but the random consequences have also caused a great loss in species diversity . dna analysis comparing the birds from 1990 and mid-century shows a steep genetic decline in recent decades . the greater prairie chicken is currently experiencing low reproductive success . population bottlenecking poses a major threat to the stability of species populations as well . papilio homerus is the largest butterfly in the americas and is endangered according to the iucn . the disappearance of a central population poses a major threat of population bottleneck . the remaining two populations are now geographically isolated and the populations face an unstable future with limited remaining opportunity for gene flow . genetic bottlenecks exist in cheetahs . . selective breeding . bottlenecks also exist among pure-bred animals ( e.g . , dogs and cats : pugs , persian ) because breeders limit their gene pools by a few ( show-winning ) individuals for their looks and behaviors . the extensive use of desirable individual animals at the exclusion of others can result in a popular sire effect . selective breeding for dog breeds caused constricting breed-specific bottlenecks . these bottlenecks have led to dogs having an average of 2–3 % more genetic loading than gray wolf . the strict breeding programs and population bottlenecks have led to the prevalence of diseases such as heart disease , blindness , cancers , hip dysplasia , cataracts , and more . selective breeding to produce high-yielding crops has caused genetic bottlenecks in these crops and has led to genetic homogeneity . national research council . ( 1972 ) . genetic vulnerability of major crops . national academies . this reduced genetic diversity in many crops could lead to broader susceptibility to new diseases or pests , which threatens global food security . . plants . research showed that there is incredibly low , nearly undetectable amounts of genetic diversity in the genome of the wollemia ( wollemia nobilis ) . the iucn found a population count of 80 mature individuals and about 300 seedlings and juveniles in 2011 , and previously , the wollemi pine had fewer than 50 individuals in the wild . the low population size and low genetic diversity indicates that the wollemi pine went through a severe population bottleneck . a population bottleneck was created in the 1970s through the conservation efforts of the endangered mauna kea silversword ( argyroxiphium sandwicense ssp . sandwicense ) . the small natural population of silversword was augmented through the 1970s with outplanted individuals . all of the outplanted silversword plants were found to be first or subsequent generation offspring of just two maternal founders . the low amount of polymorphic loci in the outplanted individuals led to the population bottleneck , causing the loss of the marker allele at eight of the loci . see also . baby boom founder effect population boom small population size . references . external links . northern elephant seal history