Silane

production . commercial-scale routes . silane can be produced by several routes . typically , it arises from the reaction of hydrogen chloride with magnesium silicide : : mg 2 si + 4 hcl → 2 mgcl 2 + sih 4 it is also prepared from metallurgical grade silicon in a two-step process . first , silicon is treated with hydrogen chloride at about 300 & nbsp ; °c to produce trichlorosilane , hsicl 3 , along with hydrogen gas , according to the chemical equation : : si + 3 hcl → hsicl 3 + h 2 the trichlorosilane is then converted to a mixture of silane and silicon tetrachloride . this redistribution reaction requires a catalyst : :4 hsicl 3 → sih 4 + 3 sicl 4 the most commonly used catalysts for this process are metal halogen , particularly aluminium chloride . this is referred to as a redistribution reaction , which is a double displacement involving the same central element . it may also be thought of as a disproportionation reaction even though there is no change in the oxidation number for silicon ( si has a nominal oxidation number iv in all three species ) . however , the utility of the oxidation number concept for a covalent molecule , even a polar covalent molecule , is ambiguous . the silicon atom could be rationalized as having the highest formal oxidation state and partial positive charge in sicl 4 and the lowest formal oxidation state in sih 4 since cl is far more electronegative than is h . an alternative industrial process for the preparation of very high purity silane , suitable for use in the production of semiconductor grade silicon , starts with metallurgical grade silicon , hydrogen , and silicon tetrachloride and involves a complex series of redistribution reactions ( producing byproducts that are recycled in the process ) and distillations . the reactions are summarized below : : si + 2 h 2 + 3 sicl 4 → 4 sihcl 3 :2 sihcl 3 → sih 2 cl 2 + sicl 4 :2 dichlorosilane → sihcl 3 + sih 3 cl :2 chlorosilane → sih 4 + sih 2 cl 2 the silane produced by this route can be thermally decomposed to produce high-purity silicon and hydrogen in a single pass . still other industrial routes to silane involve reduction of sif 4 with sodium hydride ( nah ) or reduction of sicl 4 with lithium aluminum hydride ( lialh 4 ) . another commercial production of silane involves reduction of silicon dioxide ( sio 2 ) under al and h 2 gas in a mixture of nacl and aluminum chloride ( alcl 3 ) at high pressures : shriver and atkins . inorganic chemistry ( 5th edition ) . w . h . freeman and company , new york , 2010 , p . 358 . :3 sio 2 + 6 h 2 + 4 al → 3 sih 4 + 2 al 2 o 3 . laboratory-scale routes . in 1857 , the german chemists heinrich buff and friedrich wöhler discovered silane among the products formed by the action of hydrochloric acid on aluminum silicide , which they had previously prepared . they called the compound siliciuretted hydrogen . mellor , j . w . '' a comprehensive treatise on inorganic and theoretical chemistry , '' vol vi , longmans , green and co . ( 1947 ) , p . 216 . for classroom demonstrations , silane can be produced by heating sand with magnesium powder to produce magnesium silicide ( mg 2 si ) , then pouring the mixture into hydrochloric acid . the magnesium silicide reacts with the acid to produce silane gas , which burns on contact with air and produces tiny explosions . making silicon from sand , by theodore gray . originally published in popular science magazine . this may be classified as a heterogeneous acid-base chemical reaction since the isolated si 4 − ion in the mg 2 si antifluorite structure can serve as a brønsted–lowry base capable of accepting four protons . it can be written as : :4 hcl + mg 2 si → sih 4 + 2 mgcl 2 in general , the alkaline-earth metals form silicides with the following stoichiometry : m ii 2 si , m ii si , and m ii si 2 . in all cases , these substances react with brønsted–lowry acids to produce some type of hydride of silicon that is dependent on the si anion connectivity in the silicide . the possible products include sih 4 and/or higher molecules in the homologous series si n h 2n+2 , a polymeric silicon hydride , or a silicic acid . hence , m ii si with their zigzag chains of si 2 − anions ( containing two lone pairs of electrons on each si anion that can accept protons ) yield the polymeric hydride ( sih 2 ) x . yet another small-scale route for the production of silane is from the action of sodium amalgam on dichlorosilane , sih 2 cl 2 , to yield monosilane along with some yellow polysilicon hydride ( sih ) x . mellor , j . w . '' a comprehensive treatise on inorganic and theoretical chemistry , vol . vi '' longmans , green and co . ( 1947 ) pp . 970–971 . . properties . silane is the silicon analogue of methane . because of the greater electronegativity of hydrogen in comparison to silicon , this si–h bond polarity is the opposite of that in the c–h bonds of methane . one consequence of this reversed polarity is the greater tendency of silane to form complexes with transition metals . a second consequence is that silane is pyrophoric & nbsp ; — it undergoes spontaneous combustion in air , without the need for external ignition . however , the difficulties in explaining the available ( often contradictory ) combustion data are ascribed to the fact that silane itself is stable and that the natural formation of larger silanes during production , as well as the sensitivity of combustion to impurities such as moisture and to the catalytic effects of container surfaces causes its pyrophoricity . above 420 & nbsp ; °c , silane decomposes into silicon and hydrogen ; it can therefore be used in the chemical vapor deposition of silicon . the si–h bond strength is around 384 kj/mol , which is about 20 % weaker than the h–h bond in h 2 . consequently , compounds containing si–h bonds are much more reactive than is h 2 . the strength of the si–h bond is modestly affected by other substituents : the si–h bond strengths are : sihf 3 419 kj/mol , sihcl 3 382 kj/mol , and sihme 3 398 kj/mol . m . a . brook '' silicon in organic , organometallic , and polymer chemistry '' 2000 , j . wiley , new york . . applications . while diverse applications exist for organosilanes , silane itself has one dominant application , as a precursor to elemental silicon , particularly in the semiconductor industry . the higher silanes , such as di- and trisilane , are only of academic interest . about 300 metric tons per year of silane were consumed in the late 1990s . low-cost solar photovoltaic module manufacturing has led to substantial consumption of silane for pecvd ( pecvd ) hydrogenated amorphous silicon ( a-si : h ) on glass and other substrates like metal and plastic . the pecvd process is relatively inefficient at materials utilization with approximately 85 % of the silane being wasted . to reduce that waste and the ecological footprint of a-si : h-based solar cells further several recycling efforts have been developed . briend p , alban b , chevrel h , jahan d . american air , liquide inc . ( 2009 ) '' method for recycling silane ( sih 4 ) '' . us20110011129 , ep2252550a2 . . safety and precautions . a number of fatal industrial accidents produced by combustion and detonation of leaked silane in air have been reported . silane is a pyrophoric gas ( capable of autoignition at temperatures below 54 & nbsp ; °c /130 & nbsp ; °f ) . silane msds : sih 4 + 2 o 2 → sio 2 + 2 h 2 o with δh –1517 kj/mol –47.23 kj/g : sih 4 + o 2 → sio 2 + 2 h 2 : sih 4 + o 2 → sih 2 o + h 2 o :2 sih 4 + o 2 → 2 sih 2 o + 2h 2 : sih 2 o + o 2 → sio 2 + h 2 o for lean mixtures a two-stage reaction process has been proposed , which consists of a silane consumption process and a hydrogen oxidation process . the heat of sio 2 ( s ) condensation increases the burning velocity due to thermal feedback . diluted silane mixtures with inert gases such as nitrogen or argon are even more likely to ignite when leaked into open air , compared to pure silane : even a 1 % mixture of silane in pure nitrogen easily ignites when exposed to air . in japan , in order to reduce the danger of silane for amorphous silicon solar cell manufacturing , several companies began to dilute silane with hydrogen gas . this resulted in a symbiotic benefit of making more stable solar photovoltaic cells as it reduced the staebler–wronski effect . unlike methane , silane is fairly toxic : the lethal concentration in air for rats ( lc 50 ) is 0.96 % ( 9,600 ppm ) over a 4-hour exposure . in addition , contact with eyes may form silicic acid with resultant irritation . msds for silane . vngas.com in regards to occupational exposure of silane to workers , the us national institute for occupational safety and health has set a recommended exposure limit of 5 ppm ( 7 & nbsp ; mg/m 3 ) over an eight-hour time-weighted average . . see also . silanes silanization magnesium silicide . references . cited sources . . external links . patent us2474087a , preparation of silicon halides