Gustav Meyrink

childhood . gustav meyrink was born with the name gustav meyer in vienna , austria-hungary ( now austria ) on 19 january 1868 . he was the illegitimacy son of baron karl von varnbüler und zu hemmingen , a württembergian minister , and actress maria wilhelmina adelheyd meier . meyrink was not , despite the statements of some of his contemporaries , of jewish descent – this rumour arose due to a confusion of his mother with a jewish woman of the same name . until thirteen years of age meyrink lived mainly in munich , where he completed elementary school . he then stayed in hamburg for a brief time , until his mother relocated to prague in 1883 . prague . meyrink lived in prague for twenty years and has depicted it many times in his works . in 1889 , together with the nephew of poet christian morgenstern , meyrink established his own banking company , named '' meier & morgenstern '' . in prague an event occurred which played a providential role in meyrink 's life . meyrink described it in the autobiographical short story '' the pilot '' . that day , 14 august 1892 , on assumption eve , meyrink , twenty-four years old , was allegedly standing at his table with a gun at his head , determined to shoot himself . at that moment he heard a strange scratching sound and someone 's hand put a tiny booklet under his door . the booklet was called afterlife . meyrink was surprised by this dramatic coincidence and started to study the literature of the occult . he studied theosophy , kabbala , christian sophiology and eastern mysticism . until his death meyrink practiced yoga and other occult exercises . results of these studies and practices are found in meyrink 's works , which almost always deal with various occult traditions . at that time meyrink also was a member of the hermetic order of the golden dawn in london . this is evidenced by the letter from william wynn westcott ( 1893 ) , which has remained in meyrink 's private archives . he was also member of the theosophical society , but only temporarily . in 1902 meyrink was charged with fraud . he was charged with using spiritism in order to benefit from banking operations . though , after two months , he was released from jail , his banking career was effectively ended . his jailhouse experiences are depicted in his most famous novel , the golem ( 1913–14 ) . . early works . during the 1900s meyrink started publishing satiric short stories in the magazine simplicissimus , signing them with his mother 's surname . during spring 1903 meyrink 's first book , the hot soldier was released . approximately at the same time he relocated to vienna . almost immediately after his arrival another compilation of his short stories , the orchid . strange stories , was released . on 8 may 1905 meyrink married philomene bernt , whom he had known since 1896 . on 16 july 1906 his daughter sybille felizitas was born . on 17 january 1908 , two days before meyrink 's fortieth birthday , the second son , harro fortunat , was born . subsequently , the main character of the second meyrink 's novel the green face was given the same name . in 1908 the third compilation of short stories , waxworks , was published . being in need of money , meyrink started working as a translator and he became a prolific one ; during five years he managed to translate into german fifteen volumes of charles dickens , as well as work by rudyard kipling and lafcadio hearn . he continued translating until his death , including various occult works and even the egyptian book of the dead . meyrink also edited a series of books on the occult . in 1911 meyrink relocated with his family to the little bavarian town starnberg , and in 1913 the book des deutschen spießers wunderhorn ( the german philistine 's magic horn ) was published in munich . it was a compilation of short stories from the previous three books and several new ones ; the title is a parody of des knaben wunderhorn . many of these stories had satirical styles , ridiculing institutions such as the army and the church ; austrian writer karl kraus would later describe meyrink 's work as combining '' buddhism with a dislike for the infantry '' . . fame . in 1915 the first and most famous of meyrink 's novels , the golem , was published , though its drafts may be traced back to 1908 . the novel is based on the jewish legend about a rabbi who made a living being known as a golem ( גולם ) out of clay and animated it with a kabbalistic spell , although these legends have little to do with the story 's plotline . the main character is athanasius pernath , a contemporary lapidary from prague . it is left to the reader to decide whether pernath is simply writing down his hallucinations or gradually becoming a real golem . frenschkowski describes the golem as both '' a deep-footed initiatory tale and an urban fantasy '' . the novel was a great commercial success . in 1916 one more compilation of short stories , bats , and soon a second novel , the green face , was published . the next year his third novel , walpurgis night , was written . the success of these works caused meyrink to be ranked as one of the three main german-language supernatural fiction authors ( along with hanns heinz ewers and karl hans strobl ) . meyrink was opposed to world war one , which caused him to be denounced by german nationalists ; the german '' völkisch '' journalist albert zimmermann ( 1873-1933 ) described meyrink as '' one of the cleverest and most dangerous opponents of the german nationalist ideal . he will influence & nbsp ; & ndash ; and corrupt & nbsp ; & ndash ; thousands upon thousands , just as heine did '' . in 1916 des deutschen spießers wunderhorn was banned in austria . by 1920 meyrink 's financial affairs improved so that he bought a villa in starnberg . the villa became known as '' the house at the last lantern '' after the name of the house from the golem . there he and his family lived for the next eight years and two more works – the white dominican and meyrink 's longest novel the angel of the west window – were written . in 1927 meyrink formally converted to mahayana buddhism . . death . the name '' fortunat '' did not bring much luck to meyrink 's son : during the winter of 1931 , while skiing , he seriously injured his backbone and for the rest of his life he was confined to his armchair . on 12 july , at the age of 24 , he committed suicide – at the same age his father was going to do it . meyrink survived his son by half a year . he died on 4 december 1932 in starnberg , bavaria , germany . he is buried in starnberg cemetery . reputation . frenschkowski notes '' like those of most other german and austrian fantastic writers , his books were prohibited during the nazi era '' . later , meyrink 's work enjoyed a revival ; meyrink was discussed in a special edition of the french journal l'herne ( 1976 ) , and his work was translated into french , russian , dutch and english . . bibliography . the hot soldier ( der heiße soldat und andere geschichten ) , 1903 orchideen . sonderbare geschichten , 1904 the waxworks , 1907 “ der stein der tiefe , ” fragment published in the literary and art journal pan , 1911 the german philistine 's horn ( des deutschen spießers wunderhorn ) , 1909 der violette tod , 1913 the golem ( der golem ) , serialized in 1913/1914 , published in novel form in 1915 bats ( fledermäuse ) , 1916 the green face ( das grüne gesicht ) , 1916 walpurgis night ( walpurgisnacht ) , 1917 der mann auf der flasche , 1920 the land of the time-leeches ( j.h . obereits besuch bei den zeit-egeln ) , 1920 the white dominican ( der weiße dominikaner ) , 1921 at the threshold of the beyond , 1923 goldmachergeschichten , august scherl verlag , berlin 1925 die heimtückischen champagnons und andere geschichten , 1925 meister leonhard , 1925 the angel of the west window ( der engel vom westlichen fenster ) , 1927 der uhrmacher , 1937 ( published posthumous ) . references . further reading . binder , hartmut . gustav meyrink – ein leben im bann der magie gustav meyrink – life under the spell of magic , vitalis , 2009 , mitchell , mike . vivo : the life of gustav meyrink , dedalus ltd , 2008 , montiel , luis . '' aweysha : spiritual epidemics and psychic contagion in the works of gustav meyrink '' . in : rütten , th . ; king , m . , eds . , contagionism and contagious diseases . medicine and literature 1880-1933 , berlin : de gruyter , 2013 , , p . & nbsp ; 167-183 montiel , luis : el rizoma oculto de la psicología profunda . gustav meyrink y carl gustav jung , frenia , 2012 , paul , r . f . '' esoterrica : a review of gustav meyrink 's the green face '' . esoterra 4 ( winter-spring 1994 ) , p . & nbsp ; 28-31 aster , evelin : personalbibiolographie von gustav meyrink ( bern , frankfurt/m . , las vegas : peter lang , 1980 ) wistrand , sten : '' gustav meyrink ’ s the golem . a sensationalist shlock novel or an esoteric vision of the world ? '' lir.journal , nr 12 ( 2020 ) , p . & nbsp ; 11-52 . . external links . photo and bibliography allrefer.com entry dedalus books publishers of meyrink in english bolognese tears english translation of meyrink short story simplicissimus complete edition online