John Carroll University

center for service & social action . the center for service & social action facilitates activities related to social justice as course components , and as voluntary one-time or semester-long experiences . the center for service and social action offers a variety of service opportunities for students looking to get involved and give back to the community . many john carroll university students take advantage of service opportunities during their undergraduate studies . . center for student diversity & inclusion . csdi educates students on diversity , equity and inclusion . the center nurtures a sense of belonging for students from diverse backgrounds and encourages curricular and co-curricular learning . the center advises and cultivates the leadership of its students through cultural student organizations that include : black students in action ( bsa ) , asian pop culture , le cercle francais , lgbtqia+ allies , hillel , latin america student association ( lasa ) , middle eastern student association ( mesa ) , minority association of pre-medical students ( maps ) , muslim student society ( mss ) , italian club , club for the inclusiveness of students with disabilities ( cisd ) , south asian student association ( sasa ) , and women in stem . arrupe . named for pedro arrupe , the arrupe scholars program recognizes john carroll students for their significant commitment to two interrelated values of john carroll 's mission : intellectual inquiry that demands critical thinking , and engaging in social justice and community service that leads to social action . housing . john carroll is a primarily residential campus , with over 60 % of all students living on campus in one of eight residence halls ; 90 % of freshmen and sophomores live on campus . in addition , the university owns various apartment buildings and townhouses nearby campus that become additional options for juniors and seniors in their final two years at the university . residence halls . there are eight residence halls on john carroll 's campus . during a student 's first year , they are placed in one of one the four following residence halls : pacelli hall , named after pope pius xii , is a co-ed residence hall and has a capacity of 216 . sutowski hall has a capacity of 171 students . depending on the gender proportions of each freshman class , the hall assignments vary . for the 2011–2012 academic year , sutowski hall houses male and female residents . campion hall is the newest residence hall . it was built in 1990 as '' gnu hall '' but was dedicated to edmund campion and the defunct campion high school in prairie du chien , wisconsin on november 13 , 1993 . it houses first year students and has standard dormitory style rooms . each of the residents of campion hall has access to a full kitchen and dining area . campion hall is the largest freshman dorm on campus . dolan hall was completed in 1955 and is dedicated to thomas f . dolan . from 1994 to 2006 , dolan hall was an all female dormitory but in 2007 it was changed to a co-ed , '' super-single '' style dorm with 214 students living in individual rooms . the other four residence halls house upperclassmen . all are coed but rooms are separated by gender in different wings of each hall . murphy hall houses 408 students . murphy hall is co-ed , with both male and female residents sharing the same building although not the same wings of the building . murphy hall rooms are designed in a suite-style layout . residents of murphy hall shares a room with one other person , and share a common living area with the adjacent room . hamlin hall was built in 1988 and is dedicated to richard m . hamlin , a john carroll university alumnus . 294 students reside within its walls , in standard dormitory style rooms . hamlin hall is also furnished with a complete kitchen , available for use by any of its residents . hamlin hall is the only greek life dorm on campus and is home to 5 sororities and 3 fraternities . millor hall was finished in 1981 . given its location toward the south end of campus , this building was temporarily '' south hall '' but was later changed as a dedication to rev . william j . millor in october of that year . 242 students reside in millor hall which is home to the delta tau delta fraternity floor . bernet hall was the first dormitory erected on campus in 1935 . it was built at the recommendation of a major supporter of the university and its namesake , john j . bernet , who called for a place to house those '' boys from greater cleveland who will be forced to go home every night . '' it was remodeled from its original design and is now the home of 100 upperclassmen , each of whom has an apartment style dormitory with either 2 , 4 or 6 students per apartment . residency in bernet hall is competitive and the only residence hall on john carroll 's campus requiring an application . john joseph bernet was president of the nickel plate road , erie railroad , chesapeake and ohio railway and pere marquette railroad in the united states . he was known for bringing railroad companies back from bankruptcy to solvency , earning him the nickname '' doctor of sick railroads '' . athletics . john carroll fields 23 varsity sports teams . the official colors are blue and gold , and teams compete under the nickname blue streaks . john carroll teams compete in ncaa division iii . the university has been a member institution of the ohio athletic conference since 1989 . jcu plays football , lacrosse and soccer in don shula stadium , named after alumnus and winningest coach in nfl history don shula '51 . shula contributed to the stadium 's construction , as did former washington redskins star and jcu alumnus london fletcher '98 . in 1974–75 , the wrestling team won the ncaa division iii national championship . in addition , three teams have qualified for the national semifinals in team sporting events : the 2002 football team , the 2003–04 men 's basketball team , and the 2016 football team . on november 12 , 2016 , john carroll defeated the university of mount union 31-28 , snapping the program 's college football record of 112 straight regular season wins . there have been 22 individual national champions : 16 in wrestling , two in men 's outdoor track & field , one in men 's indoor track & field , one in women 's outdoor track & field , one in women 's diving , and one in men 's swimming . the men 's and women 's swimming and diving team has won back to back oac championship titles ( 2017 , 2018 ) , the men 's tennis team has won four straight oac titles ( 2015 , 2016 , 2017 , 2018 ) , the women 's tennis team won three straight oac titles in 2016 , 2017 , and 2018 , and the men 's lacrosse team has won three consecutive titles in the regular season and tournament ( 2016 , 2017 , 2018 ) . the jcu men 's basketball team won the oac regular season and tournament titles in 2018 . since joining the oac in 1989–90 , john carroll has won twice as many regular season titles ( 11 ) in men 's basketball than any other school ( 5 ) over that span of time . in club sports , the 2017–18 club rugby team qualified for the national championship . . notable people . see also . association of jesuit colleges and universities ohio athletic conference wjcu the carroll news . references . external links . official athletics website