Dalhart, Texas

2010 census . as of the 2010 census , dalhart had a population of 7,930 living in 2,957 housing locations ; 50.3 % of the population was male , with 49.7 % being female . the census revealed that 28.9 % of the population was under the age of 18 , while 12.4 % of citizens were over the age of 65 . with an area of 4.78 square miles , the city of dalhart has a population density of 1659.0 persons/square mile . census data showed that 84.0 % of the population identified as white , while 1.2 % identified as black/african american , 0.7 % identified as asian , 0.9 % identified as native american , and 0.1 % were pacific islander . about 10.5 % of the remaining population identified themselves as some other race , while 2.5 % considered themselves to be of two or more races , and 34.0 % of the population identified themselves as hispanic or latino of any race . in 2010 , 9.9 % of the population identified as being foreign-born , with 25.4 % of households in dalhart speaking a primary language other than english at home . data demonstrated that 79.6 % of residents over 25 had earned at least a high-school diploma , while 16.4 % had obtained a bachelor 's degree or higher . over the 4-year period between 2007 and 2011 , the median household income was 53,210 , with a larger mean ( average ) household income of 69,190 . the median per-capita income was 24,979 . the census showed that 6.4 % of the population lived below the federal poverty line , and 3.4 % of the population was unemployed . around 71.1 % of dalhart residents owned a home , with the median home value being 91,800 . as of 2010 , 829 businesses were registered in the city . . economy . dalhart 's economy is centered around agribusiness , including farming , ranching , feedlot operations , large-scale pig farms , and more recently , a cheese processing plant . dalhart is also home to a state prison . during the peak operating period of the xit ranch , the land was in prairie . some land was diverted into dry farmland , but the rain was insufficient to make it productive . a few irrigation wells were drilled in areas where the soil was not sandy and was level enough for irrigation . later , center pivot irrigation , credited to colorado farmer frank zybach in 1949 , was introduced and was found to be ideal for the area 's rolling sandy soils . about the same time , large feedlots were built due to the low-humidity climate . this created a good market for corn , which is the major crop grown by farmers in the area . in the mid-2000s , a combination of tax incentives , texas ' relatively unrestricted environmental regulations , and dalhart 's existing agricultural infrastructure attracted industrial dairy farms to the area . in 2007 , hilmar cheese company of california capitalized on the resulting milk availability , opening a major production plant in dalhart . texas governor rick perry visited dalhart to speak at the company 's official welcoming ceremony , reiterating the company 's projection that 2000 new jobs would be created in the region by the emerging dairy product production industry . this factory and the surrounding dairies are a significant emerging subsector of dalhart 's established agribusiness culture . the international agribusiness company cargill owns a 21,500-acre hog-production site near dalhart . . arts and culture . annual cultural events . dalhart is known as the '' xit city '' because of its relationship with the historic xit ranch . the ranch was a plot of land traded in exchange for the construction of the texas state capitol in austin . the ranch was dissolved in 1912 , but its history is celebrated with the city 's xit museum and the xit rodeo and reunion . held annually on the first full thursday through sunday weekend of august , the event includes the world 's largest free barbecue , junior rodeo , professional rodeo cowboys association events , and three nights of live music . the empty saddle monument , located at the crossroads of dalhart , was constructed in 1940 at the request of bobby dycke , the wife of a ranch hand , to recognize the contribution of the xit cowboys to the history of the region . the muscle car party weekend is held each year in may , and includes a classic car show , bicycle drag races , and dinner and dance . the events are sponsored by the dalhart cruzers car club , and each year , the club raffles a classic car . . education . the dalhart independent school district serves the city of dalhart . the district has an elementary school , intermediate school , junior high school , and high school . students attend dalhart high school , which competes athletically and scholastically in district 1 division 3a of texas ' university interscholastic league . in 2012 , frank phillips college opened a branch in dalhart , offering both credit and community-education classes . . media . the dalhart texan was established in 1901 , and is published in dalhart . the newspaper is currently published twice a week and has been owned by the hogue family for the past 60 years . susan hogue clay is the present owner and publisher . . infrastructure . prison system . the texas department of criminal justice 's dalhart unit prison is located in unincorporated hartley county , near dalhart . '' dalhart unit . '' texas department of criminal justice . retrieved on june 4 , 2010 . . gallery . file : dalhart welcome sign img 0567.jpg welcome sign at dalhart , texas file : brick streets of dalhart , tx img 0556.jpg streets paved with brick in downtown dalhart file : dalhart texan newspaper img 0558.jpg founded on december 11 , 1902 , the dalhart texan newspaper is published tuesday and friday on denrock street in dalhart . file : mission twins theater in downtown dalhart img 0564.jpg the former mission twins theater in downtown dalhart is covered in stucco over the original brick to give it an adobe look . file : dallam-hartley counties veterans memorial img 0559.jpg dalhart and dallam-hartley counties honor military veterans in a city park . file : james r . fox , jr . , of dalhart , tx img 0562.jpg this historical marker at dallam county courthouse honors james r . fox , jr . ( 1919–43 ) , of dalhart for his unique world war ii service . file : xit museum sign img 0561.jpg the xit museum operates across the street from the dallam county courthouse in dalhart . file : empty saddle monument in dalhart , tx img 0566.jpg empty saddle monument at the crossroads of dalhart ( u.s . highway 87 , 385 , and 54 ) has honored the memory of the cowboys of the defunct xit ranch . . see also . dalhart municipal airport . references . further reading . timothy egan , the worst hard time ( mariner books , 2006 ) . external links . city of dalhart official website dalhart chamber of commerce