Passacaglia

origin . the term passacaglia ; ; italian : passacaglia , passacaglio , passagallo , passacagli , passacaglie ) derives from the spanish pasar ( to walk ) and calle ( street ) . it originated in early 17th-century spain as a strummed interlude between instrumentally accompanied dances or songs . despite the form 's spanish roots ( confirmed by references in spanish literature of the period ) , the first written examples of passacaglias are found in an italian source dated 1606 . these pieces , as well as others from italian sources from the beginning of the century , are simple , brief sequences of chords outlining a cadence ( music ) . the passacaglia was redefined in the late 1620s by italian composer girolamo frescobaldi , who transformed it into a series of continuous variations over a bass ( which itself may be varied ) . later composers adopted this model , and by the nineteenth century the word came to mean a series of variations over an ostinato pattern , usually of a serious character . a similar form , the chaconne , was also first developed by frescobaldi . the two genres are closely related , but since '' composers often used the terms chaconne and passacaglia indiscriminately . modern attempts to arrive at a clear distinction are arbitrary and historically unfounded '' . in early scholarship , attempts to formally differentiate between the historical chaconne and passacaglia were made , but researchers often came to opposite conclusions . for example , percy goetschius held that the chaconne is usually based on a harmonic sequence with a recurring soprano melody , and the passacaglia was formed over a ground bass pattern , whereas clarence lucas defined the two forms in precisely the opposite way . more recently , however , some progress has been made toward making a useful distinction for the usage of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries , when some composers ( notably frescobaldi and françois couperin ) deliberately mixed the two genres in the same composition . . composers . image : autograafbach582 2.jpg thumb the first page of a manuscript of the passacaglia and fugue in c minor , bwv 582 , by johann sebastian bach some examples are the organ passacaglias of dieterich buxtehude , johann pachelbel , sigfrid karg-elert , johann caspar kerll , daniel gregory mason , georg muffat , gottlieb muffat , johann kuhnau , juan bautista cabanilles , bernardo pasquini , max reger , ralph vaughan williams ( passacaglia on b–g–c , 1933 ) , and leo sowerby . passacaglias for lute have been composed by figures such as alessandro piccinini , giovanni girolamo kapsperger , sylvius leopold weiss , esaias reusner , count logy , robert de visée , jacques bittner , philipp franz lesage de richee , gleitsmann , dufaut , gallot , denis gaultier , ennemond gaultier , and roman turovsky-savchuk , a passacaglia for bandura by julian kytasty , and for baroque guitar by paulo galvão , santiago de murcia , francesc guerau , gaspar sanz , and marcello vitale . baroque . one of the best known examples of the passacaglia in classical music is the passacaglia and fugue in c minor , bwv 582 , for organ by johann sebastian bach . the french harpsichord , especially louis couperin and his nephew françois couperin , used a variant of the form—the passecaille en rondo—with a recurring episode between the variations . heinrich ignaz franz biber 's '' passacaglia '' , the last piece of the monumental rosary sonatas , is one of the earliest known compositions for solo violin . the central episode of claudio monteverdi 's madrigal lamento della ninfa is a passacaglia on a descending tetrachord . the first two movements of the fourth sonata from johann heinrich schmelzer 's sonatæ unarum fidium are passacaglias on a descending tetrachord , but in uncharacteristic major . the fourth movement of luigi boccherini 's quintettino no . 6 , op . 30 , ( also known as musica notturna delle strade di madrid ) is titled '' passacalle '' . other examples of passacaille include les plaisirs ont choisi from jean-baptiste lully 's opera armide ( 1686 ) and dido 's lament , when i am laid in earth from henry purcell 's dido and aeneas , the aria piango , gemo , sospiro by antonio vivaldi , or '' usurpator tiranno '' and stabat mater by giovanni felice sances , et al . romantic . nineteenth-century examples include the c-minor passacaglia for organ by felix mendelssohn , and the finale of josef rheinberger 's eighth organ sonata . notable passacaglias by johannes brahms can be found in the last movement of his fourth symphony , which many musicians place among brahms ' finest compositions . composed by brahms to conform to the strict metrics of ballet , british conductor constant lambert called the piece '' grimly intellectual '' . in brahms 's variations on a theme by haydn , the bass repeats the same harmonic pattern throughout the piece . the last movement of george frideric handel 's harpsichord suite in g minor ( hwv 432 ) is a passacaglia which has become well known as a duo for violin and viola , arranged by the norwegian violinist johan halvorsen . the first movement of hans huber 's piano concerto no . 3 , op . 113 ( 1899 ) is a passacaglia . contemporary . the passacaglia proved an enduring form throughout the twentieth century and beyond . in mid-century , one writer stated that '' despite the inevitable lag in the performance of new music , there are more twentieth-century passacaglias in the active repertory of performers than baroque works in this form '' . three composers especially identified with the passacaglia are benjamin britten , dmitri shostakovich , and paul hindemith . in his operas , britten often uses a passacaglia to create the climactic moment of the drama . examples are found in peter grimes , billy budd , the turn of the screw , death in venice , and even in the comic opera albert herring . britten also employed the form in smaller vocal forms , such as the serenade for tenor , horn and strings ( 1943 ) and the holy sonnets of john donne ( 1945 ) for voice and piano , as well as in purely instrumental compositions , notably in the second and third cello suites , the second and third string quartets , the cello symphony , and the nocturnal after john dowland for guitar . shostakovich restricted his use of the passacaglia to instrumental forms , the most notable examples being found in his tenth string quartet , second piano trio , eighth and fifteenth symphonies , and first violin concerto . hindemith employed the form to conclude his 1938 ballet , nobilissima visione , and it is also found in his early sonata for viola solo , op . 11 , no . 5 ( 1919 ) and the second movement of the song cycle das marienleben ( 1948 ) , as well as in later works such as the fifth string quartet and the octet for winds and strings . igor stravinsky used the form for the central movement of his septet ( 1953 ) , a transitional work between his neoclassical and serial periods . especially important examples of the form are found in the output of the second viennese school . anton webern 's opus 1 is a passacaglia for orchestra , arnold schoenberg included a passacaglia movement , '' nacht '' , in pierrot lunaire , and alban berg , like britten , used a passacaglia operatically , in act 1 , scene 4 of wozzeck . references . bibliography . . external links . passacaglias and chaconnes for lute passacaglias and chaconnes for baroque guitar