Spherical geometry

overview . in euclidean geometry , the basic concepts are points and ( straight ) lines . in spherical geometry , the basic concepts are point and great circle . in the extrinsic 3-dimensional picture , a great circle is the intersection of the sphere with any plane through the center . in the intrinsic approach , a great circle is a geodesic ; a shortest path between any two of its points provided they are close enough . or , in the ( also intrinsic ) axiomatic approach analogous to euclid 's axioms of plane geometry , '' great circle '' is simply an undefined term , together with postulates stipulating the basic relationships between great circles and the also-undefined '' points '' . this is the same as euclid 's method of treating point and line as undefined primitive notions and axiomatizing their relationships . great circles in many ways play the same logical role in spherical geometry as lines in euclidean geometry , e.g . , as the sides of ( spherical ) triangles . this is more than an analogy ; spherical and plane geometry and others can all be unified under the umbrella of geometry riemannian geometry , where '' lines '' are defined to mean shortest paths ( geodesics ) . many statements about the geometry of points and such '' lines '' are equally true in all those geometries provided lines are defined that way , and the theory can be readily extended to higher dimensions . nevertheless , because its applications and pedagogy are tied to solid geometry , and because the generalization loses some important properties of lines in the plane , spherical geometry ordinarily does not use the term '' line '' at all to refer to anything on the sphere itself . if developed as a part of solid geometry , use is made of points , straight lines and planes ( in the euclidean sense ) in the surrounding space . in spherical geometry , angles are defined between great circles , resulting in a spherical trigonometry that differs from ordinary trigonometry in many respects ; for example , the sum of the interior angles of a spherical triangle exceeds 180 degrees . relation to similar geometries . spherical geometry is closely related to elliptic geometry . an important geometry related to that of the sphere is that of the real projective plane ; it is obtained by identifying antipodal points ( pairs of opposite points ) on the sphere . locally , the projective plane has all the properties of spherical geometry , but it has different global properties . in particular , it is orientability , or one-sided , and unlike the sphere it can not be drawn as a surface in 3-dimensional space without intersecting itself . concepts of spherical geometry may also be applied to the spheroid , though minor modifications must be implemented on certain formulas . higher-dimensional spherical geometries exist ; see elliptic geometry . history . greek antiquity . the earliest mathematical work of antiquity to come down to our time is on the rotating sphere ( περὶ κινουμένης σφαίρας , peri kinoumenes sphairas ) by autolycus of pitane , who lived at the end of the fourth century bc . spherical trigonometry was studied by early greek mathematics such as theodosius of bithynia , a greek astronomer and mathematician who wrote the sphaerics , a book on the geometry of the sphere , and menelaus of alexandria , who wrote a book on spherical trigonometry called sphaerica and developed menelaus ' theorem . . islamic world . the book of unknown arcs of a sphere written by the islamic mathematician al-jayyani is considered to be the first treatise on spherical trigonometry . the book contains formulae for right-handed triangles , the general law of sines , and the solution of a spherical triangle by means of the polar triangle . school of mathematical and computational sciences university of st andrews the book on triangles by regiomontanus , written around 1463 , is the first pure trigonometrical work in europe . however , gerolamo cardano noted a century later that much of its material on spherical trigonometry was taken from the twelfth-century work of the andalusi scholar jabir ibn aflah . victor j . katz-princeton university press . euler 's work . leonhard euler published a series of important memoirs on spherical geometry : l . euler , principes de la trigonométrie sphérique tirés de la méthode des plus grands et des plus petits , mémoires de l'académie des sciences de berlin 9 ( 1753 ) , 1755 , p . & nbsp ; 233–257 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxvii , p . & nbsp ; 277–308 . l . euler , eléments de la trigonométrie sphéroïdique tirés de la méthode des plus grands et des plus petits , mémoires de l'académie des sciences de berlin 9 ( 1754 ) , 1755 , p . & nbsp ; 258–293 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxvii , p . & nbsp ; 309–339 . l . euler , de curva rectificabili in superficie sphaerica , novi commentarii academiae scientiarum petropolitanae 15 , 1771 , pp . & nbsp ; 195–216 ; opera omnia , series 1 , volume 28 , pp . & nbsp ; 142–160 . l . euler , de mensura angulorum solidorum , acta academiae scientiarum imperialis petropolitinae 2 , 1781 , p . & nbsp ; 31–54 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxvi , p . & nbsp ; 204–223 . l . euler , problematis cuiusdam pappi alexandrini constructio , acta academiae scientiarum imperialis petropolitinae 4 , 1783 , p . & nbsp ; 91–96 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxvi , p . & nbsp ; 237–242 . l . euler , geometrica et sphaerica quaedam , mémoires de l'académie des sciences de saint-pétersbourg 5 , 1815 , p . & nbsp ; 96–114 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxvi , p . & nbsp ; 344–358 . l . euler , trigonometria sphaerica universa , ex primis principiis breviter et dilucide derivata , acta academiae scientiarum imperialis petropolitinae 3 , 1782 , p . & nbsp ; 72–86 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxvi , p . & nbsp ; 224–236 . l . euler , variae speculationes super area triangulorum sphaericorum , nova acta academiae scientiarum imperialis petropolitinae 10 , 1797 , p . & nbsp ; 47–62 ; opera omnia , series 1 , vol . xxix , p . & nbsp ; 253–266 . properties . spherical geometry has the following properties : any two great circles intersect in two diametrically opposite points , called antipodal points . any two points that are not antipodal points determine a unique great circle . there is a natural unit of angle measurement ( based on a revolution ) , a natural unit of length ( based on the circumference of a great circle ) and a natural unit of area ( based on the area of the sphere ) . each great circle is associated with a pair of antipodal points , called its poles which are the common intersections of the set of great circles perpendicular to it . this shows that a great circle is , with respect to distance measurement on the surface of the sphere , a circle : the locus of points all at a specific distance from a center . each point is associated with a unique great circle , called the polar circle of the point , which is the great circle on the plane through the centre of the sphere and perpendicular to the diameter of the sphere through the given point . as there are two arcs determined by a pair of points , which are not antipodal , on the great circle they determine , three non-collinear points do not determine a unique triangle . however , if we only consider triangles whose sides are minor arcs of great circles , we have the following properties : the angle sum of a triangle is greater than 180° and less than 540° . the area of a triangle is proportional to the excess of its angle sum over 180° . two triangles with the same angle sum are equal in area . there is an upper bound for the area of triangles . the composition ( product ) of two reflections-across-a-great-circle may be considered as a rotation about either of the points of intersection of their axes . two triangles are congruent if and only if they correspond under a finite product of such reflections . two triangles with corresponding angles equal are congruent ( i.e . , all similar triangles are congruent ) . relation to euclid 's postulates . if '' line '' is taken to mean great circle , spherical geometry obeys two of euclid 's postulates : the second postulate ( '' to produce extend a finite straight line continuously in a straight line '' ) and the fourth postulate ( '' that all right angles are equal to one another '' ) . however , it violates the other three : contrary to the first postulate , there is not a unique shortest route between any two points ( antipodal points such as the north and south poles on a spherical globe are counterexamples ) ; contrary to the third postulate , a sphere does not contain circles of arbitrarily great radius ; and contrary to the parallel postulate , there is no point through which a line can be drawn that never intersects a given line . timothy gowers , mathematics : a very short introduction , oxford university press , 2002 : pp . 94 and 98 . a statement that is equivalent to the parallel postulate is that there exists a triangle whose angles add up to 180° . since spherical geometry violates the parallel postulate , there exists no such triangle on the surface of a sphere . the sum of the angles of a triangle on a sphere is , where f is the fraction of the sphere 's surface that is enclosed by the triangle . for any positive value of f , this exceeds 180° . see also . spherical astronomy spherical distance spherical polyhedron half-side formula lénárt sphere versor . notes . references . roshdi rashed and athanase papadopoulos ( 2017 ) menelaus ' spherics : early translation and al-mahani'/alharawi 's version . critical edition of menelaus ' spherics from the arabic manuscripts , with historical and mathematical commentaries , de gruyter series : scientia graeco-arabica 21 . external links . the geometry of the sphere rice university navigation spreadsheets : navigation triangles sphaerica - geometry software for constructing on the sphere