Heaven 17

history . 1980s . ian craig marsh and martyn ware were the founding members of pioneering british electro-pop group the human league ; glenn gregory had been their original choice when seeking a lead singer for the band but he was unavailable at the time , so they chose philip oakey instead . when personal and creative tensions within the group reached a breaking point in late 1980 , marsh and ware left the band , ceding the human league name to oakey . taking their new name from a fictional pop band mentioned in anthony burgess 's dystopian novel , a clockwork orange ( where the heaven seventeen are at number 4 in the charts with '' inside '' ) , they became heaven 17 and formed the production company british electric foundation ( b.e.f . ) . b.e.f . 's first recordings were a cassette-only album called music for stowaways and an lp called music for listening to , which was re-released on cd in 1997 with two extra tracks . shortly after , they completed their line-up when they recruited their friend , photographer glenn gregory , as vocalist . like the human league , heaven 17 used synthesisers and drum machines heavily ( the linn lm-1 programmed by ware ) . session musicians were used for bass guitar and guitar ( john wilson ) and grand piano ( nick plytas ) . whereas the band 's former colleagues the human league had gone on to major chart success in 1981 , heaven 17 struggled to make an impact . their debut single '' ( we do n't need this ) fascist groove thang '' attracted some attention and , due to its overtly left-wing politics lyrics , was banned by the bbc due to concerns by radio 1 's legal department that it libelled ronald reagan , who had recently been elected president of the united states . neither this nor any other of the four singles taken from the band 's debut album penthouse and pavement managed to reach the top 40 in the uk singles chart . the album itself proved to be a success , peaking at number 14 on the uk albums chart , and was later certified gold by the bpi in 1982 . was unable to complete the album . in october 1982 , heaven 17 released their new single '' let me go '' , which charted just outside the uk top 40 ( but reached the irish top 30 ) . however , in 1983 the band 's fortunes changed . their next single , '' temptation '' ( on which they were augmented by vocalist carol kenyon and a studio orchestra ) , reached number 2 on the uk singles chart in spring 1983 and became their biggest hit . the song was taken from their second album , the luxury gap , which featured further chart hits '' come live with me '' ( uk 5 ) and '' crushed by the wheels of industry '' ( uk 17 ) . the album itself charted at number 4 on the uk albums chart , their highest ever position , and was certified platinum by the bpi in 1984 . , plus frequent mtv exposure . towards the end of 1983 , the band ( under their b.e.f . guise and assisted by greg walsh ) helped relaunch tina turner 's career , producing , and providing backing vocals on her hit '' let 's stay together '' , a cover of the al green song . 1984 saw the release of heaven 17 's third studio album , how men are , which reached number 12 in the uk albums chart and was certified silver by the bpi . the album featured the earth , wind & fire brass section , and two singles from the album ( '' sunset now '' and '' this is mine '' ) both reached the uk top 40 , but would be the band 's last singles to do so until various remixes were released in the 1990s . the band also worked on the band aid single '' do they know it 's christmas ? '' at the end of 1984 , with gregory supplying vocals alongside midge ure and sting , after a personal request from ure that he attend . however , the band did not perform at live aid the following year . heaven 17 's first '' live '' performance was in 1986 on the uk television programme the tube ( though the band made use of backing tapes during this performance ) . after the remix album endless peaked at number 70 in july 1986 , the band 's fourth studio album pleasure one was released in november 1986 and featured the single '' trouble '' ( uk no . 51 , germany 17 ) . the album contained a number of songs that were originally intended for a french film project that never came to be . this was also the first heaven 17 album to not mention production credits for b.e.f . and the abbreviation would not appear again until the bigger than america album in 1996 . it was followed up in 1988 with the album teddy bear , duke & psycho ( featuring the singles '' train of love in motion '' and '' the ballad of go go brown '' ) , although these two albums were poorly received and had little commercial success . in september 1988 , the band appeared on the bill at the sport aid event in sheffield . heaven 17 were managed by keith bourton for heavenly management ltd . during much of this period . 1990s . the early 1990s was a quiet period for the band , though ware produced a second b.e.f . album in 1991 , to follow 1982 's original music of quality & distinction . this album again featured tina turner and billy mackenzie , but this time also featured artists such as scritti politti 's green gartside , lalah hathaway , billy preston , and chaka khan . ware also became a producer for the likes of terence trent d'arby , soft cell 's marc almond , and erasure . gregory , meanwhile , went on to form the band honeyroot with keith lowndes , then ugly with john uriel and ian wright . in late 1992 , a brothers in rhythm remix of '' temptation '' reached number 4 and was followed by the compilation album higher and higher – the best of heaven 17 in 1993 . remixes of '' ( we do n't need this ) fascist groove thang '' and '' penthouse and pavement '' were also minor hits in 1993 . however , the band would not release any new material as heaven 17 until 1996 's bigger than america . the album failed to chart in the uk . . 2000s . the year 2005 saw the release of a new studio album , before after , which had a much more contemporary dance sound compared to previous albums . a cd composed entirely of remixes of the song '' hands up to heaven '' from the album reached number six on the us billboard dance club songs chart in may 2006 . in october of the same year , virgin records issued a greatest hits compilation album entitled sight and sound , which included a previously-unheard version of '' temptation '' with spoken vocals by an unknown student from germany whom the band met in 1982 . it had been discovered on 1-inch tape by gregory 's mother and was remastered by simon heyworth . in november 2005 , heaven 17 were filmed for a live dvd playing to a packed house at the scala in london . the dvd contains an in-depth question-and-answer session with both ware and gregory , along with fans ' reactions to the gig . in december 2008 , heaven 17 toured the uk as part of the sheffield band-based steel city tour alongside the human league and abc . coinciding with this was the release of their new album , naked as advertised , issued through the just music record label . the album contained re-workings of tracks such as '' temptation '' along with versions of ware songs best known from his time with the human league , including '' being boiled '' and '' empire state human '' , as well as a cover of the associates ' hit '' party fears two '' . the band were managed by nick ashton-hart for much of the early 2000s . in december 2009 , heaven 17 made appearances at the '' nokia night of the proms '' in germany . . 2010s . on 16 february 2010 , heaven 17 joined la roux to record a joint live session for the bbc which was shown on the bbc red button interactive channel in january 2010 . glenn gregory joined la roux on stage at glastonbury festival on 26 june 2010 , performing '' temptation '' . ( la roux cite heaven 17 as one of their main influences ) . the two acts also appeared live on stage at the war child brit awards aftershow in february 2010 . in the run up to their 30th anniversary , the band announced several dates in which they would perform their 1981 debut album penthouse and pavement live in its entirety for the first time . the dates were scheduled over november and december 2010 with the first date held on 10 november 2010 at the well known leadmill live music venue in sheffield . by chance the leadmill also celebrated a 30-year anniversary in 2010 . by their own admission this leadmill gig was one of the band 's most successful . the band performed a couple of dates of the penthouse and pavement tour in march 2010 , one of which was in sheffield and was filmed and shown on bbc two on 16 may 2010 . an hour-long documentary about the making of the album was shown on bbc two the following night . this film was also screened at a special '' music in sheffield '' evening of films at the showroom in sheffield , at which martyn ware attended , on the eve of the announcement of the city of culture 2013 . the band appeared on later . with jools holland on 22 october 2010 , performing '' ( we do n't need this ) fascist groove thang '' and '' temptation '' and appeared in children in need in november 2010 . they also made a tongue-in-cheek appearance in tv advertisements for sheffield-based broadband provider plusnet . on 22 november , the band released a 2 disc dvd combining never-seen-before documentary and rehearsal footage with the band 's full live concert filmed in sheffield in march 2010 . also included was a unique collection of all the digital videos used in the live show , set to the accompanying live audio from the performance . each video was commissioned from a different visual artist and included both established up-and-coming artists from the worlds of digital and graphic design , fine art , and film . since 2011 the band 's regular keyboard player has been berenice scott ( the daughter of robin scott of the group m and '' pop muzik '' fame ) . in july 2014 , they appeared as special guests of john shuttleworth in his bbc radio 4 programme john shuttleworth 's music lounge and performed some of shuttleworth 's material . in november 2015 , a compilation album called 80s recovered featured many groups including heaven 17 . they performed a cover of elton john 's '' rocket man '' , with a regular version , and a remix . during october 2016 , heaven 17 undertook a dual headline tour with their british electronic foundation ( b.e.f . ) the dates included venues in liverpool , birmingham , glasgow , gateshead , manchester , bury st edmunds , basingstoke and london . b.e.f . enlisted mari wilson , glen matlock ( sex pistols ) , and peter hooton ( the farm ) to present new arrangements of songs from the b.e.f . back catalogue . the tour was significant in that it was the first time that heaven 17 had played the sheffield city hall ; having not performed there during the 1980s . in january 2017 , ware and gregory started work on a new album at ware 's london studio '' the house of illustrious '' . a work-in-progress version of this album has been released by bowers & wilkins under the title '' not for public broadcast '' ( society of sound 105 ) . in may 2018 the band announced a short tour which took place in late november and early december 2018 . gigs in liverpool , london , bristol , glasgow , manchester and sheffield celebrated the 35th anniversary of the luxury gap album . the tour support was provided by x-propaganda featuring claudia brücken and susanne freytag from '80s band propaganda . in november 2018 it was announced that the band would be taking part as 'special guests ' on 'the difford and tilbrook songbook 2019 ' tour . the gigs will see south-london legends squeeze - featuring lyricist chris difford and music writer glenn tilbrook - play at 25 venues across the uk during october and november . discography . penthouse and pavement ( 1981 ) the luxury gap ( 1983 ) how men are ( 1984 ) pleasure one ( 1986 ) teddy bear , duke & psycho ( 1988 ) bigger than america ( 1996 ) before after ( 2005 ) naked as advertised ( 2008 ) . references . external links . heaven 17 official website heaven 17 at youtube heaven 17 at discogs