Lake Winnipeg

hydrography . lake winnipeg has the largest watershed of any lake in canada , receiving water from four u.s . states ( north dakota , south dakota , minnesota and montana via tributaries of the oldman river ) and four canadian provinces ( alberta , saskatchewan , ontario and manitoba ) . the lake 's watershed measures about . its drainage is about 40 times larger than its surface , a ratio bigger than any other large lake in the world . lake winnipeg drains northward into the nelson river at an average annual rate of 2,066 cubic metres per second ( 72,960 & nbsp ; cu & nbsp ; ft/s ) , and forms part of the hudson bay watershed , which is one of the largest drainage basins in the world . this watershed area was known as rupert 's land when the hudson 's bay company was royal charter . tributaries . the saskatchewan river flows in from the west through cedar lake , the red river ( including assiniboine river ) flows in from the south , and the winnipeg river ( draining lake of the woods , rainy river and rainy lake ) enters from the southeast . the dauphin river enters from the west , draining lake manitoba and lake winnipegosis . the bloodvein river , berens river , poplar river and the manigotagan river flow in from the eastern side of the lake which is within the canadian shield . other tributaries of lake winnipeg ( clockwise from the south end ) include ; meleb drain ( drainage canal ) , drunken river , icelandic river , washow bay creek , sugar creek , beaver creek , mill creek , moose creek , fisher river , jackhead river , kinwow bay creek , jackpine creek , mantagao river , solomons creek , jumping creek , warpath river , south two rivers , north two rivers , south twin creek , north twin creek , saskachaywiak creek , eating point creek , woody point creeks , muskwa creek , buffalo creek , fiddler creek , sturgeon creek , hungry river , cypress creek , william river , bélanger river , mukutawa river , crane creek , kapawekapuk creek , marchand creek , leaf river , pigeon river , taskapekawe creek , bradbury river , petopeko creek , loon creek , sanders creek , rice river , wanipigow river , barrie creek , mutch creek , sandy river , black river , sandy creek , catfish creek , jackfish creek , marais creek , brokenhead river and devils creek . . geology . lake winnipeg and lake manitoba are remnants of prehistoric lake agassiz , although there is evidence of a desiccated south basin of lake winnipeg approximately 4,000 years ago . the area between the lakes is called the interlake region , and the whole region is called the manitoba lowlands . natural history . fish . the varying habitats found within the lake support a large number of fish species , more than any other lake in canada west of the great lakes . sixty of seventy-nine native species found in manitoba are present in the lake . families represented include lampreys ( petromyzontidae ) , sturgeon ( sturgeon ) , mooneyes ( mooneye ) , minnows ( cyprinidae ) , suckers ( catostomidae ) , catfish ( ictaluridae ) , pikes ( esox ) , trout and whitefish ( salmonidae ) , troutperch ( percopsidae ) , codfish ( gadidae ) , sticklebacks ( stickleback ) , sculpins ( cottidae ) , sunfish ( centrarchidae ) , perch ( percidae ) , and drum ( sciaenidae ) . two fish species present in the lake are considered to be at risk , the shortjaw cisco and the bigmouth buffalo . rainbow trout and brown trout are stocked in manitoba waters by provincial fisheries as part of a put and take program to support angling opportunities . neither species is able to sustain itself independently in manitoba . smallmouth bass was first recorded from the lake in 2002 , indicating populations introduced elsewhere in the watershed are now present in the lake . white bass were first recorded from the lake in 1963 , ten years after being introduced into baldhill dam in north dakota . common carp were introduced to the lake through the red river of the north and are firmly established . . birds . lake winnipeg provides feeding and nesting sites for a wide variety of birds associated with water during the summer months . isolated , uninhabited islands provide nesting sites for colonial nesting birds including pelicans , gulls and terns . large marshes , shores and shallows allow these birds to successfully feed themselves and their young . pipestone rocks are considered a globally significant site for american white pelicans . in 1998 , an estimated 3.7 % of the world 's population of this bird at the time were counted nesting on the rocky outcrops . the same site is significant within north america for the numbers of colonial waterbirds using the area , especially common terns . other globally significant nesting areas are found at gull island and sandhill island , little george island and louis island . birds nesting at these sites include common and caspian terns , herring gull , ring-billed gull , double-crested cormorant and greater scaup . lake winnipeg has two sites considered globally important in the fall migration . large populations of waterfowl and shorebirds use the sand bars east of riverton as a staging area for fall migration . the netley-libau marsh , where the red river enters lake winnipeg , is used by geese , ducks and swallows to gather for the southward migration . piping plover , an endangered species of shorebird , are found in several locations around the lake . the gull bay spits , south of the town of grand rapids are considered nationally significant nesting sites for this species . . protected areas . beaver creek provincial park camp morton provincial park elk island provincial park fisher bay provincial park grand beach provincial park hecla-grindstone provincial park hnausa beach provincial park kinwow provincial park patricia beach provincial park sturgeon bay provincial park winnipeg beach provincial park . environmental issues . lake winnipeg is suffering from many environmental issues such as an explosion in the population of algae , caused by excessive amounts of phosphorus seeping into the lake , therefore not absorbing enough nitrogen . 1.1m for lake winnipeg - winnipeg free press canada ’ s sickest lake , maclean 's magazine the phosphorus levels are approaching a point that could be dangerous for human health . the global nature fund declared lake winnipeg as the '' threatened lake of the year '' in 2013 . in 2015 , there was a major uptick of zebra mussels in lake winnipeg , the reduction of which is next to impossible because of a lack of natural predators in the lake . the mussels are devastating to the ecological opportunities of the lake . lake winnipeg a lost cause - cbc online . history . it is believed henry kelsey was the first european to see the lake , in 1690 . he adopted the cree language name for the lake : wīnipēk ( ᐐᓂᐯᐠ ) , meaning '' muddy waters '' . la vérendrye referred to the lake as ouinipigon when he built the first forts in the area in the 1730s . later , the red river colony to its south took the lake 's name for winnipeg , the capital of manitoba . lake winnipeg lies along one of the oldest trading routes in north america to have flown the british flag . for several centuries , furs were traded along this route between york factory on hudson bay fur trade canoe routes of canada/ then and now by eric w . morse canada national and historic parks branch , first printing 1969 . ( which was the longtime headquarters for the hudson 's bay company ) over lake winnipeg and the red river trails to the confluence of the minnesota and mississippi rivers at saint paul , minnesota . this was a strategic trading route for the first british empire . with the establishment of the second british empire after britain 's loss of the thirteen colonies , a significant increase in trade occurred over lake winnipeg between rupert 's land and the united states . economy . transportation . because of its length , the lake winnipeg water system and the lake was an important transportation route in the province before the railways reached manitoba . it continued to be a major transportation route even after the railways reached the province . in addition to aboriginal canoes and york boats , several steamboats plied the lake , including anson northup , city of selkirk , colvile , keenora , premier , princess , winnitoba , wolverine and most recently the diesel-powered ms lord selkirk ii passenger cruise ship . communities . communities on the lake include grand marais , lester beach , riverton , gimli , winnipeg beach , victoria beach , hillside beach , pine falls , manigotagan , berens river , bloodvein , sandy hook , albert beach , hecla village and grand rapids . a number of pleasure beaches are found on the southern end of the lake , which are popular in the summer , attracting many visitors from winnipeg , about 80 & nbsp ; km south . commercial fisheries . lake winnipeg has important commercial fisheries . its catch makes up a major part of manitoba 's 30 million per year fishing industry . the lake was once the main source of goldeye in canada , which is why the fish is sometimes called winnipeg goldeye . walleye and whitefish together account for over 90 percent of its commercial fishing . . see also . list of lakes of manitoba . notes .