Attack aircraft

definition and designations . united states definition and designations . presently , u.s . attack aircraft are identified by the prefix a- , as in '' a-6 intruder '' and '' a-10 thunderbolt ii '' . however , until the end of world war ii the a- designation was shared between attack planes and light bombers johnson 2008 , p . 413 . merriman 2000 , p . 3 . for usaaf aircraft ( as opposed to b- prefix for medium or heavy bombers ) . the us navy used a separate designation system and at the time preferred to call similar aircraft scout bombers ( sb ) or torpedo bombers ( tb or bt ) . for example , douglas sbd dauntless scout bomber was designated a-24 when used by the usaaf . it was not until 1946 , when the us navy and us marine corps started using the '' attack '' ( a ) designation , when it renamed bt2d skyraider and btm mauler to , respectively , ad skyraider and am mauler . '' 1911–2004 ' a ' . '' '' u.s . military aircraft designations . retrieved : 28 november 2015 . as with many aircraft classifications , the definition of attack aircraft is somewhat vague and has tended to change over time . current u.s . military doctrine defines it as an aircraft which most likely performs an attack mission , more than any other kind of mission . attack mission means , in turn , specifically tactical air-to-ground action—in other words , neither air-to-air action nor strategic bombing is considered an attack mission . pierrot and vines 1997 , pp . 2–4 . in united states navy vocabulary , the alternative designation for the same activity is a strike mission . attack missions are principally divided into two categories : air interdiction and close air support . in the last several decades , the rise of the ubiquitous multi-role fighter has created some confusion about the difference between attack and fighter aircraft . according to the current u.s . designation system , an attack aircraft ( a ) is designed primarily for air-to-surface ( attack : aircraft designed to find , attack , and destroy land or sea targets ) designating and naming defense military aerospace vehicles 2005 . missions ( also known as '' attack missions '' ) , while a fighter category f incorporates not only aircraft designed primarily for air-to-air combat , but additionally multipurpose aircraft designed also for ground-attack missions . was designated f despite having only minimal air-to-air capabilities . only a single aircraft in the usaf 's current inventory bears a simple , unmixed '' a '' designation : the a-10 thunderbolt ii . other designations . british designations have included fb for fighter-bomber and more recently '' g '' for '' ground-attack '' as in harrier gr1 ( meaning '' ground-attack/reconnaissance , mark 1 '' ) . the nato reporting names for soviet/russian ground-attack aircraft at first started with '' b '' categorizing them as bombers , as in case of il-10 'beast ' . but later they were usually classified as fighters ( '' f '' ) —possibly because ( since sukhoi su-7 ) they were similar in size and visual appearance to soviet fighters , or were simply derivatives of such . history . world war i . the attack aircraft as a role was defined by its use during world war i , in support of ground forces on battlefields . battlefield support is generally divided into close air support and battlefield air interdiction , the first requiring strict and the latter only general cooperation with friendly surface forces . hallion 2010 , pp . 3–6 . though such aircraft also attacked targets in rear areas . such missions required flying where light anti-aircraft fire was expected and operating at low altitudes to precisely identify targets . other roles , including those of light bombers , medium bombers , dive bombers , reconnaissance , fighters , fighter-bombers , could and did perform air strikes on battlefields . cooling 1990 , pp . 101 , 123 . all these types could significantly damage ground targets from a low level flight , either by bombing , machine guns , or both . attack aircraft came to diverge from bombers and fighters . while bombers could be used on a battlefield , their slower speeds made them extremely vulnerable to ground fire , as did the lighter construction of fighters . the survivability of attack aircraft was guaranteed by their speed/power , protection ( i.e . armour panels ) and strength of construction ; germany was the first country to produce dedicated ground-attack aircraft ( designated cl-class and j-class ) . they were put into use in autumn 1917 , thetford 1954 , p . 56 . during world war i . most notable was the junkers j.i , which pioneered the idea of an armoured '' bathtub '' , that was both fuselage structure and protection for engine and crew . the british experimented with the sopwith tf series ( termed '' trench fighters '' ) , although these did not see combat . the last battles of 1918 on the western front demonstrated that ground-attacking aircraft were a valuable component of all-arms tactics . close support ground strafing ( machine gun ) and tactical bombing of infantry ( especially when moving between trenches and along roads ) , machine gun posts , artillery , and supply formations was a part of the allied armies ' strength in holding german attacks and supporting allied counter-attacks and offensives . admittedly , the cost to the allies was high , with the royal flying corps sustaining a loss rate approaching 30 % among ground-attack aircraft . 1919 & ndash ; 1939 . after world war i , it was widely believed that using aircraft against tactical targets was of little use other than in harassing and undermining enemy morale ; attacking combatants was generally much more dangerous to aircrews than their targets , a problem that was continually becoming more acute with the ongoing refinement of anti-aircraft weapons . within the range of types serving attack roles , dive bombers were increasingly being seen as more effective than aircraft designed for strafing with machine guns or cannons . nevertheless , during the 1920s , the us military , in particular , procured specialized '' attack '' aircraft and formed dedicated units , that were trained primarily for that role . the us army engineering division became involved in designing ground attack aircraft . the 1920 boeing ga-1 was an armoured twin-engine triplane for ground strafing with eight machine guns and about a ton of armour plate , and the 1922 aeromarine pg-1 was a combined pursuit ( fighter ) and ground attack design with a 37mm gun . the united states marine corps aviation applied close air support tactics in the banana wars . while they did not pioneer dive bombing tactics , marine aviators were the first to include it in their doctrine during the united states occupation of haiti and nicaragua . corum and johnson 2003 , pp . 23–40 . the united states army air corps was notable for its creation of a separate '' a- '' designation for attack types , distinct from and alongside '' b- '' for bomber types and '' p- '' for pursuit ( later replaced by '' f- '' for fighter ) aircraft . the first designated attack type to be operational with the usaac was the curtiss falcon . nevertheless , such aircraft , including the a-2 's replacement , the curtiss a-12 shrike , were unarmored and highly vulnerable to aa fire . the british royal air force focused primarily on strategic bombing , rather than ground attack . however , like most air arms of the period it did operate attack aircraft , named army cooperation in raf parlance , which included the hawker hector , westland lysander and others . during the 1930s , nazi germany had begun to field a class of schlacht ( '' battle '' ) aircraft , such as the henschel hs 123 . moreover , the experiences of german condor legion during the spanish civil war , against an enemy with few fighter aircraft , changed ideas about ground attack . though equipped with generally unsuitable designs such as the henschel hs 123 and cannon-armed versions of the heinkel he 112 , their armament and pilots proved that aircraft were a very effective weapon , even without bombs . this led to some support within the luftwaffe for the creation of an aircraft dedicated to this role , resulting in tenders for a new '' attack aircraft '' . this led to the introduction ( in 1942 ) of a unique single-seat , twin-engine attack aircraft , the slow-moving but heavily armored and formidably armed henschel hs 129 panzerknacker ( '' safecracker '' / '' tank cracker '' ) . in japan , the imperial japanese navy had developed the aichi d3a dive bomber ( based on the heinkel he 70 ) and the mitsubishi b5m light attack bomber . both , like their us counterparts , were lightly armored types , and were critically reliant on surprise attacks and the absence of significant fighter or aa opposition . during the winter war , the soviet air forces used the polikarpov r-5sss , and polikarpov r-zsh , as attack aircraft . perhaps the most notable attack type to emerge during the late 1930s was the soviet ilyushin il-2 sturmovik , which became the most-produced military aircraft type in history . as world war ii approached , the concept of an attack aircraft was not well defined , and various air services used many different names for widely differing types , all performing similar roles ( sometimes in tandem with non-attack roles of bombers , fighters , reconnaissance and other roles . ; army co-operation the british concept of a light aircraft mixing all the roles that required extensive communication with land forces : reconnaissance , liaison , artillery spotting , aerial supply , and , last but not least , occasional strikes on the battlefield . cooling 1990 , pp . 1 , 158 , 244 , 263 . hallion 2010 , p . 152 . gunston 2009 , p . 61 . the concept was similar to front-line aircraft used in the world war i , which was called the cl class in the german empire . hallion 2010 , pp . 16-22 , 77 . eventually the raf 's experience showed types such as westland lysander to be unacceptably vulnerable and it was replaced by faster fighter types for photoreconnaissance , and light aircraft for artillery spotting . ; light bomber during the inter-war period , the british considered that in a future war it would be france that would be the enemy . for the light day bomber they had the fairey battle which originated in a 1932 specification . designs in 1938 for a replacement were adapted as a target tug . the last british specification issued for a light bomber was b.20/40 described as a '' close army support bomber '' capable of dive bombing and photoreconnaissance . however , the specification was dropped before an aircraft went into production . buttler p . 67 . ; dive bomber in some air services , dive bombers did not equip ground-attack units , but were treated as a separate class . in nazi germany , the luftwaffe distinguished between the stuka ( sturzkampf- , '' dive bombing '' ) units , equipped with junkers ju 87 from schlacht ( '' battle '' ) units , using strafing/low-level bombing types such as the henschel hs 123 ) . ; fighter-bomber although not a synonymous class with ground-attack aircraft , fighter-bombers were usually used for the role , and proved to excel at it , even when they were only lightly armored . the royal air force and united states army air forces relegated obsolescent fighters to this role , while cutting-edge fighters would serve as interceptors and establish air superiority . the united states navy , in distinction to the usaaf , preferred the older term '' scout-bomber '' , under a '' sb- '' designation , such as the curtiss sb2c helldiver . world war ii . the junkers ju 87s of the german luftwaffe became virtually synonymous with close air support during the early months of world war ii . the british commonwealth 's desert air force , led by arthur tedder , became the first allied tactical formation to emphasise the attack role , usually in the form of single-engine hawker hurricane and curtiss p-40 fighter-bombers or specialized '' tank-busters '' , such as the hurricane mk iid , armed with two 40 & nbsp ; mm vickers s guns ( notably no . 6 squadron raf ) . at around the same time , a massive invasion by axis forces had forced the soviet air forces to quickly expand their army support capacity , such as the ilyushin il-2 sturmovik . the women pilots known as the '' night witches '' utilised an obsolescent , wooden light trainer biplane type , the polikarpov po-2 and small anti-personnel bombs in '' harassment bombing '' attacks that proved difficult to counter . wartime experience showed that poorly armored and/or lightly built , pre-war types were unacceptably vulnerable , especially to fighters . nevertheless , skilled crews could be highly successful in those types , such as the leading stuka ace , hans-ulrich rudel , who claimed 500 tanks , a battleship , a cruiser , and two destroyers in 2,300 combat missions . the bristol beaufighter , based on an obsolescent raf bomber , became a versatile twin-engine attack aircraft and served in almost every theatre of the war , in the maritime strike and ground attack roles as well as that of night fighter . conversely , some mid-war attack types emerged as adaptations of fighters , including several versions of the german focke-wulf fw 190 , the british hawker typhoon and the us republic p-47 thunderbolt . the typhoon , which was disappointing as a fighter , due to poor high altitude performance , was very fast at low altitudes and thus became the raf 's premier ground attack fighter . it was armed with four 20mm cannon , augmented first with bombs , then rockets . likewise the p-47 was designed and intended for use as a high altitude bomber escort , but gradually found that role filled by the north american p-51 mustang ( because of its much longer range and greater manoeuvrability ) . the p-47 was also heavier and more robust than the p-51 and regarded therefore , as an '' energy fighter '' : ideal for high-speed dive-and-climb tactics , including strafing attacks . its armament of eight 0.50 caliber machine guns was effective against axis infantry and light vehicles in both europe and the pacific . while machine guns and cannon were initially sufficient , the evolution of well-armored tanks required heavier weapons . to augment bombs , missile were introduced , although these unguided projectiles were still '' barely adequate '' because of their inaccuracy . gooderson 1998 , p . 121 . for the british rp3 , one hit per sortie was considered acceptable . mason 1998 , p . 50 . however , even a near miss with rockets could cause damage or injuries to '' soft targets '' and patrols by allied rocket-armed aircraft over normandy disrupted or even completely paralyzed german road traffic . they also affected morale , because even the prospect of a rocket attack was unnerving . shores and thomas 2005 , pp . 245–250 . the ultimate development of the cannon-armed light attack aircraft was the small production run in 1944 of the henschel hs 129b-3 , armed with a modified pak 40 75 mm anti-tank gun . this weapon , the bordkanone bk 7,5 , was the most powerful forward-firing weapon fitted to a production military aircraft during world war ii . the only other aircraft to be factory-equipped with similar guns were the 1,420 maritime strike variants of the north american b-25 mitchellg/h , which mounted either a m4 cannon , or light-weight t13e1 or m5 versions of the same gun . these weapons , however , were hand-loaded , had shorter barrels and/or a lower muzzle velocity than the bk 7,5 and , therefore , poorer armor penetration , accuracy and rate of fire . ( except for versions of the piaggio p.108 armed with a 102mm anti-ship cannon , the bk 7,5 was unsurpassed as an aircraft-fitted gun until 1971 , when the four-engine lockheed ac-130e spectre ; equipped with a 105 & nbsp ; mm m102 howitzer & ndash ; entered service with the us air force . ) . post-world war ii . in the immediate post war era the piston-engined ground-attack aircraft remained useful since all of the early jets lacked endurance due to the fuel consumption rates of the jet engines . the higher powered piston engine types that had been too late for world war ii were still capable of holding their own against the jets as they were able to both out accelerate and out manoeuver the jets . the royal navy hawker sea fury fighters and the u.s . vought f4u corsair and douglas a-1 skyraider were operated during the korean war while the latter continued to be used throughout the vietnam war . many post-world war ii era air forces have been reluctant to adopt fixed-wing jet aircraft developed specifically for ground attack . although close air support and interdiction remain crucial to the modern battlefield , attack aircraft are less glamorous than fighters , while air force pilots and military planners have a certain well-cultivated contempt for '' mud-movers '' . more practically , the cost of operating a specialized ground-attack aircraft is harder to justify when compared with multirole combat aircraft . jet attack aircraft were designed and employed during the cold war era , such as the carrier-based nuclear strike douglas a-3 skywarrior and north american a-5 vigilante , while the grumman a-6 intruder , f-105 thunderchief , f-111 , f-117 nighthawk , ltv a-7 corsair ii , sukhoi su-25 , a-10 thunderbolt , panavia tornado , amx , dassault étendard , super étendard and others were designed specifically for ground-attack , strike , close support and anti-armor work , with little or no air-to-air capability . ground attack has increasingly become a task of converted trainers , like the bae systems hawk or aero l-39 albatros , and many trainers are built with this task in mind , like the casa c-101 or the aermacchi mb-339 . such counter-insurgency aircraft are popular with air forces which can not afford to purchase more expensive multirole aircraft , or do n't wish to risk the few such aircraft they have on light ground attack missions . a proliferation of low intensity conflicts in the post-world war ii era has also expanded need for these types of aircraft to conduct counter-insurgency and light ground attack operations . a primary distinction of post-world war ii aviation between the u.s . army and the u.s . air force was that latter had generally been allocated all fixed-wing aircraft , while helicopters were under control of the former ; this was governed by the 1948 key west agreement . the army , wishing to have its own resources to support its troops in combat and faced with a lack of air force enthusiasm for the ground-attack role , developed the dedicated attack helicopter . recent history . on 17 january 1991 , task force normandy began its attack on two iraqi anti-aircraft missile sites . tf normandy , under the command of ltc richard a . '' dick '' cody , consisted of nine ah-64 apaches , one uh-60 black hawk and four air force mh-53j pave low helicopters . the purpose of this mission was to create a safe corridor through the iraqi air defense system . the attack was a huge success and cleared the way for the beginning of the allied bombing campaign of gulf war . bradin 1994 one concern involving the apache arose when a unit of these helicopters was very slow to deploy during u.s . military involvement in kosovo . according to the army times , '' tradoc cuts apaches ’ role in deep attack . '' murdoc online , 1 may 2006 . retrieved : 28 november 2015 . the army is shifting its doctrine to favour ground-attack aircraft over attack helicopters for deep strike attack missions because ground-attack helicopters have proved to be highly vulnerable to small-arms fire ; the u.s . marine corps has noted similar problems . trimble , stephen . '' general : deep-strike , urban tactics for attack helicopters may need rreview . '' aviation week , 30 july 2003 . retrieved : 28 november 2015 . in the late 1960s the united states air force requested a dedicated close air support ( cas ) plane that became the fairchild republic a-10 thunderbolt ii . the a-10 was originally conceived as an anti-armor weapon ( the fairchild republic a-10 thunderbolt ii a-x program ) with limited secondary capability in the interdiction and tactical bombing roles . today it remains the only dedicated fixed-wing ground-attack aircraft in any u.s . military service . overall u.s . experience in the gulf war , kosovo war , afghanistan and iraq war has resulted in renewed interest in such aircraft . the u.s . air force is currently researching a replacement for the a-10 and started the oa-x program to procure a light attack aircraft . the soviets ' similar sukhoi su-25 ( frogfoot ) found success in the '' flying artillery '' role with many air forces . the uk has completely retired the bae harrier ii in 2011 , perry , dominic . '' uk harrier fleet sold as £115 million worth of spare parts . '' flight international , 24 november 2011 . retrieved : 7 december 2011 . and the panavia tornado dedicated attack-reconnaissance aircraft in 2019 . it obtained the f-35 in 2018 and it retains its fleet of eurofighter typhoon multirole fighters . see also . air interdiction air-to-ground weaponry counter-insurgency aircraft gunship interdictor list of attack aircraft pace-finletter mou 1952 embraer emb 314 super tucano . references . notes . . bibliography . bradin , james w.from hot air to hellfire : the history of army attack aviation . new york : presidio press , 1994 . cooling , franklin , b . case sstudies in the development of close air support . washington , d.c . : office of air force history , united states . air force , 1990 . corum , james s . and wray r . johnson . airpower in small wars : fighting insurgents and terrorists . lawrence , kansas : university press of kansas , 2003 . designating and naming defense military aerospace vehicles . washington , d.c . : united states department of the air force , 2005 . gooderson , ian . air power at the battlefront : allied close air support in europe , 1943-45 . london : routledge , 1998 . gunston , bill . the cambridge aerospace dictionary . cambridge , uk : cambridge university press , 2009 . hallion , richard . strike from the sky : the history of battlefield air attack , 1910–1945 . tuscaloosa , alabama : alabama press , 2010 . johnson , e . r . american attack aircraft since 1926 . jefferson , north carolina : mcfarland & company , 2008 . mason , tim . the secret years : flight testing at boscombe down , 1939–1945 . manchester , uk : hikoki publications , 1998 . merriman , ray . '' a : light bombing . b : medium and heavy bombing . '' u.s . wwarplanes of world war ii , volume 1 . bennington , virginia : merriam press , 2000 . mortensen , daniel r . a pattern for joint operations : world war ii close air support , north africa . washington , d.c . : office of air force history , 1987 . pierrot , lane and jo ann vines . a look at tomorrow 's tactical air forces . collingdale , pennsylvania : diane publishing , 1997 . shores , christopher and chris thomas . second tactical air force , volume two : breakout to bodenplatte july 1944 to january 1945 . hersham , surrey , uk : ian allan publishing ltd , 2005 . thetford , owen gordon . '' halberstadt cl.ii appearance at the western front . '' aircraft of the 1914–1918 war . harleyford , hertfordshire , uk : harleyford publications , 1954 .