1915 in literature

events . january – the geração de orpheu launch the short-lived magazine orpheu , introducing literary modernism to portugal . january 13 – '' reminiscences of sergeant michael cassidy '' , the first known story by captain h . c . mcneile , royal engineers , writing as '' sapper '' , begins in the daily mail ( london ) . p . 4 . february 28 – rupert brooke sails with the british mediterranean expeditionary force , but develops sepsis from an infected mosquito bite . this ends with his death in a hospital ship off skyros . his collection 1914 & other poems , including the sonnet '' the soldier '' , appears posthumously in may . march – ford madox ford 's novel the good soldier is published by john lane – the bodley head in london under this title , and under the author 's original name , ford madox hueffer , although he had intended it to be called the saddest story . march 26 – virginia woolf 's first novel , the voyage out , is published in london by the firm of her half-brother , gerald duckworth . april 6 – the american ezra pound 's poetry collection cathay , '' translations . for the most part of the chinese of rihaku , from the notes of the late ernest fenollosa , and the decipherings of the professors mori and ariga '' , by elkin mathews , is published in london . april 24 – deportation begins of armenian notables from istanbul . among the literary deportees killed in the armenian genocide are dikran chökürian , armen dorian , melkon giurdjian , ardashes harutiunian , jacques sayabalian , ruben sevak , siamanto , rupen zartarian and actor yenovk shahen . survivors include yervant odian and alexander panossian . may 3 – the rondeau '' in flanders fields '' by the canadian poet john mccrae is written ; it is first published on december 8 in the london magazine punch . may 7 – the sinking of the rms lusitania claims 1,198 victims . the americans among them in this torpedo attack on a civilian passenger liner include the writer and playwright justus miles forman ( born 1875 ) , the theatrical producer charles frohman ( born 1856 ) , the writer and philosopher elbert hubbard ( born 1856 ) and his second wife alice moore hubbard ( born 1861 ) , and the playwright charles klein ( born 1867 ) . the survivors include the british-born writer and educator ian holbourn and the bookseller charles e . lauriat , jr . may 13 – as julian grenfell stands talking with other officers , a shell lands some yards away and a splinter hits him in the head . he is taken to a hospital in boulogne , where he dies 13 days later . his poem '' into battle '' is published in the times the following day . his younger brother gerald william ( billy ) grenfell is killed in action two months later . c . may – publication of the first modern book illustrated with wood engravings , frances cornford 's spring morning , from the poetry bookshop , london , has engravings by her cousin gwen raverat . june 24 – the widener library at harvard university is dedicated . june 26 – august 14 – p . g . wodehouse 's novel something fresh is serialized in the saturday evening post ( u.s . ) , introducing the character of lord emsworth of blandings castle . it first appears in book form on september 3 in new york , from d . appleton & company , and on september 16 in london , from methuen . august/september – john buchan 's thriller the thirty-nine steps , set just before the outbreak of war and introducing as hero richard hannay , is serialised in blackwood 's magazine . book publication follows in october by william blackwood and sons in edinburgh . august–december – ezra pound completes the early sections of his poem the cantos . september 15 – p . g . wodehouse 's story '' extricating young gussie '' is published in the saturday evening post ( u.s . ) . it introduces as characters jeeves and bertie . september 30 – d . h . lawrence 's novel the rainbow is prosecuted on its appearance in london under the obscene publications act 1857 , and suppressed by his publisher , methuen . the u.s . edition appears in november without any legal challenge . october – franz kafka 's seminal novella the metamorphosis ( die verwandlung ) is first published in die weißen blätter ( leipzig ) . jg . 2 pp . 1177–1230 . kafka finishes writing the trial ( der process ) this year , but it will not be published until 1925 , the year after his death . october 15 – detective story magazine is first published by street & smith of new york , a successor to nick carter stories . november – the german author heinrich mann 's essay on émile zola in die weißen blätter marks zola 's political commitment and attacks the economic causes of the war . this temporarily disrupts mann 's relations with his younger brother , the novelist thomas mann . unknown dates james joyce , tristan tzara and vladimir lenin all take up residence in zürich , in a coincidence to be exploited in tom stoppard 's 1974 play travesties . alfred a . knopf , sr . establishes the publishers alfred a . knopf in new york city . the goudy old style serif typeface is created by frederic goudy for american type founders . . new books . fiction . ryūnosuke akutagawa – '' rashōmon '' ( 羅生門 , short story published in teikoku bungaku ) victor appleton – tom swift and his aerial warship ruby m . ayres – richard chatterton , v.c . mariano azuela – the underdogs ( los de abajo ) e . f . benson – the oakleyites stella benson – i pose john buchan – the thirty-nine steps willa cather – the song of the lark joseph conrad – victory arthur conan doyle – the valley of fear theodore dreiser – the '' genius '' caradoc evans – my people ( story collection ) edna ferber – emma mc chesney and co . ronald firbank – vainglory ford madox ford – the good soldier charlotte perkins gilman – herland anna katharine green – the golden slipper , and other problems for violet strange hermann hesse – knulp franz kafka – the metamorphosis d . h . lawrence – the rainbow jack london – the little lady of the big house arthur machen compton mackenzie – guy and pauline the bowmen ; and other legends of the war the great return w . somerset maugham – of human bondage oscar micheaux – the forged note mori ōgai ( 森 鷗外 ) – sansho the steward ( 山椒大夫 , sanshō dayū ) john muir travels to alaska letters to a friend natsume sōseki ( 夏目 漱石 ) – grass on the wayside ( 道草 , michikusa ) e . phillips oppenheim – the game of liberty baroness orczy a bride of the plains the bronze eagle p . d . ouspensky – strange life of ivan osokin ( странная жизнь ивана осокина ) eleanor h . porter – pollyanna grows up dorothy richardson – pointed roofs sax rohmer – the yellow claw rafael sabatini – the sea hawk ruth sawyer – the primrose ring edgar wallace the man who bought london the melody of death jean webster – dear enemy h . g . wells – boon luang wilatpariwat – khwam mai phayabat ( no vendetta ; first full-length thai novel , adapted from english ) harry leon wilson – ruggles of red gap p . g . wodehouse something fresh psmith , journalist virginia woolf – the voyage out . children and young people . gerdt von bassewitz – peter and anneli 's journey to the moon ( peterchens mondfahrt ) l . frank baum the scarecrow of oz aunt jane 's nieces in the red cross ( as edith van dyne ) waldemar bonsels – himmelsvolk ( people in the sky ) frances hodgson burnett – the lost prince edgar rice burroughs – the return of tarzan russell thorndike – doctor syn : a tale of the romney marsh else ury nesthäkchen 's first school year nesthäkchen in the children 's sanitorium . drama . susan glaspell – suppressed desires avery hopwood fair and warmer sadie love agha hashar kashmiri – bilwamangal cleves kinkead – common clay louis n . parker – mavourneen patrick pearse – the singer ( written ) caton theodorian – bujoreștii horace annesley vachell – the case of lady camber . poetry . c . j . dennis – the songs of a sentimental bloke ( verse novel ) t . s . eliot – the love song of j . alfred prufrock h . b . elliott , ed . – lest we forget : a war anthology geoffrey faber – interflow , poems mainly lyrical rudyard kipling – '' my boy jack '' francis ledwidge – songs of the fields vladimir mayakovsky – a cloud in trousers alice meynell – poems of the war barbu nemțeanu – stropi de soare fernando pessoa – opiário and ode marítima jessie pope – jessie pope 's war poems and more war poems . non-fiction . john hay beith – the first hundred thousand john buchan – nelson 's history of the war ( begun ) hall caine – the drama of 365 days : scenes in the great war rudyard kipling – the fringes of the fleet ( essays and poems ) friedrich naumann – mitteleuropa may sinclair – a journal of impressions in belgium percy sykes – a history of persia zhonghua da zidian ( 中華大字典 ) ( great chinese dictionary ) . births . january 1 – branko ćopić , bosnian serb writer ( suicide 1984 ) february 2 – khushwant singh , indian novelist and journalist ( died 2014 ) march 8 – drue heinz , born doreen english , british-american patron ( died 2018 ) march 13 – protiva bose ( ranu shome ) , bengali singer and writer ( died 2006 ) march 18 – richard condon , american novelist ( died 1996 ) march 26 – hwang sun-won , korean fiction writer ( died 2000 ) may 8 – milton meltzer , american historian and author ( died 2009 ) may 10 – monica dickens , english novelist ( died 1992 ) may 12 – joe david brown , american novelist and journalist ( died 1976 ) may 27 – herman wouk , american novelist ( died 2019 ) june 10 – saul bellow , american writer ( died 2005 ) july 1 alun lewis , welsh poet in english ( died 1944 ) jean stafford , american fiction writer ( died 1979 ) july 7 – margaret walker , american poet and novelist ( died 1998 ) july 14 – jerome lawrence , american dramatist ( died 2004 ) july 31 – herbert aptheker , american historian ( died 2003 ) august 19 – ring lardner , jr . , american journalist and screenwriter ( died 2000 ) august 28 – claude roy , french poet ( died 1997 ) august 30 – jack simmons , english historian ( died 2000 ) september 27 – marjorie chibnall , english medievalist , biographer and translator ( died 2012 ) october 17 – arthur miller , american dramatist ( died 2005 ) october 24 – marghanita laski , english biographer , novelist and broadcaster ( died 1988 ) november 8 – g . s . fraser , scottish poet and critic ( died 1980 ) november 12 – roland barthes , french literary theorist ( died 1980 ) december 22 – david martin , hungarian-born australian poet ( died 1997 ) december 27 – john cornford , english poet ( died 1936 ) . deaths . january 3 – james elroy flecker , english poet , novelist and dramatist ( tuberculosis , born 1884 ) february 4 – mary elizabeth braddon , english popular novelist ( born 1837 ) april 8 – louis pergaud , french novelist ( killed in action , born 1882 ) april 23 – rupert brooke , english war poet ( blood poisoning , born 1887 ) may 11 – lucy bethia walford , scottish novelist and artist ( born 1845 ) may 26 – julian grenfell , english war poet ( killed in action , born 1888 ) july 5 – aurelio tolentino , filipino dramatist ( born 1867 ) august 19 – tevfik fikret , ottoman turkish poet and journalist ( diabetes , born 1867 ) . september 1 – august stramm , german expressionist poet and playwright ( killed in action , born 1874 ) september 27 – remy de gourmont , french symbolist poet , novelist , and critic ( stroke , born 1858 ) october 17 – edmond laforest , haitian french-language poet ( suicide , born 1876 ) november 14 – booker t . washington , american writer and educator ( born 1856 ) december 23 – roland leighton , english war poet ( died of wounds , born 1895 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : romain rolland ( french ) . references . see also . world war i in literature