Triggerfish

anatomy and appearance . the largest member of the family , the stone triggerfish ( pseudobalistes naufragium ) reaches , but most species have a maximum length between . triggerfish have an oval-shaped , highly compressed body . the head is large , terminating in a small but strong- jawed mouth with teeth adapted for crushing shells . the eyes are small , set far back from the mouth , at the top of the head . the anterior dorsal fin is reduced to a set of three spines . the first spine is stout and by far the longest . all three are normally retracted into a groove . characteristic of the order tetraodontiformes , the anal and posterior dorsal fins are capable of undulating from side to side to provide slow movement and comprise their primary mode of propulsion . the sickle-shaped caudal fin is used only to escape predators . the two pelvic fins are overlaid by skin for most of their length and fused to form a single spine , terminated by very short rays , their only external evidence . gill plates ( opercula ) , although present , are also not visible , overlaid by the tough skin , covered with rough , rhomboid scales that form a stout armor on their bodies . the only gill opening is a vertical slit , directly above the pectoral fins . this peculiar covering of the gill plates is shared with other members of the tetradontae . each jaw contains a row of four teeth on either side , while the upper jaw contains an additional set of six plate-like pharyngeal teeth . as a protection against predation , triggerfish can erect the first two dorsal spines : the first ( anterior ) spine is locked in place by erection of the short second spine , and can be unlocked only by depressing the second , “ trigger ” spine , hence the family name “ triggerfish ” . with the exception of a few species from the genus xanthichthys , the sexes of all species in this family are similar in appearance . behavior . the rather bizarre anatomy of the triggerfishes reflects their typical diet of slow-moving , bottom dwelling crustaceans , mollusks , sea urchins and other echinoderms , generally creatures with protective shells and spines . many will also take small fishes and some , notably the members of the genus melichthys , feed on algae . a few , for example the redtoothed triggerfish ( odonus niger ) , mainly feed on plankton . they are known to exhibit a high level of fish intelligence , and have the ability to learn from previous experiences . some triggerfish species can be quite aggressive when guarding their eggs . both the picasso ( rhinecanthus aculeatus ) and titan triggerfish ( balistoides viridescens ) viciously defend their nests against intruders , including scuba divers and snorkelers . their territory extends in a cone from the nest toward the surface , so swimming upwards can put a diver further into the fishes ' territory ; a horizontal swim away from the nest site is best when confronted by an angry triggerfish . unlike the relatively small picasso triggerfish , the titan triggerfish poses a serious threat to inattentive divers due to its large size and powerful teeth . . male territoriality . triggerfish males migrate to their traditional spawning sites prior to mating and establish territories . some male species ( i.e . balistes carolinensis and pseudobalistes flavimarginatus ) build hollow nests within their territories . triggerfish males are fierce in guarding their territories as having a territory is essential for reproduction . a male 's territory is used for spawning and parental care . most male territories are located over a sandy sea bottom or on a rocky reef . a single territory usually includes more than one female , and the male mates with all of the females residing in or visiting his territory ( polygyny ) . in hachijojima , izu islands , japan , one male crosshatch triggerfish ( xanthichthys mento ) has up to three females in his territory at the same time , and mates with them in pairs . each male red-toothed triggerfish ( odonus niger ) mates with more than 10 females in his territory on the same day . yellow margin triggerfish ( pseudobalistes flavimarginatus ) also exhibit polygyny . spawning and biparental care . triggerfish spawning is timed in relation to lunar cycles , tides , and time of changeover of tides . in relation to lunar cycles , eggs are observed 2–6 days before the full moon and 3–5 days before the new moon . in relation to tides , spawning happens 1–5 days before the spring tide . in relation to timing of tides , eggs are observed on days when high tides take place around sunset . male and female triggerfish perform certain prespawning behaviors : blowing and touching . a male and female blow water on the sandy bottom ( usually in the same spot at the same time ) and set up their egg site . they touch their abdomens on the bottom as if they are spawning . during actual spawning , eggs are laid on the sandy sea bottom ( triggerfish are demersal spawners despite their large size ) . eggs are scattered and attached to sand particles . triggerfish eggs are usually very small ( diameter of 0.5–0.6 mm ) and are easily spread by waves . after spawning , both the male and female participate in caring for the fertilized eggs ( biparental egg care ) . a female triggerfish stays near the spawning ground , around 5 m off the bottom , and guards the eggs within her territory against intruders . some common intruders include parupeneus multifasciatus , zanclus cornutus , prionurus scalprum , and conspecifics . besides guarding , females roll , fan , and blow water on eggs to provide oxygen to the embryos , thereby inducing hatching . this behavior of female triggerfish is called '' tending '' , and males rarely perform this behavior . a male triggerfish stays farther above the eggs and guards all the females and eggs in his territory . males exhibit aggressive behaviors against conspecific males near the boundaries of their territories . mating systems . in crosshatch triggerfish ( xanthichthys mento ) and yellow margin triggerfish ( pseudobalistes flavimarginatus ) , eggs are spawned in the morning and they hatch after the sunset on the same day . after hatching of embryos , the female crosshatch triggerfish leaves the male 's territory . this mating system is an example of male-territory-visiting polygamy . triggerfishes exhibit other types of mating systems , as well , such as a nonterritorial-female ( ntf ) polygyny and territorial-female ( tf ) polygyny . in ntf polygyny , nonterritorial females stay in the male 's territory and reproduce . in tf polygyny , a female owns territory within a male 's territory and will spawn in her territory . . life history . triggerfish lay their demersal eggs in a small hole dug in the sea bottom . off florida , juveniles of some species of triggerfishes are found in floating sargassum , where they feed on the small shrimp , crab , and mollusca found there . . edibility . some species of triggerfish , such as the titan triggerfish , may be ciguatera and should be avoided . others , however , such as the grey triggerfish ( balistes capriscus ) , are edible . . gallery . file : reef trigger fish . ( 11111536093 ) . jpg the reef triggerfish is the state fish of hawaii . file : balistapus undulatus.jpg most triggerfish are aggressive , but few match the orange-lined triggerfish . file:2005-03-01 - gilded triggerfish.jpg the gilded triggerfish is among the few sexually dimorphic triggerfish . the female lacks the blue throat and yellow fin-edging . file : redtoothed triggerfish.jpg the redtoothed triggerfish is one of the relatively few planktivores of the family . file:4987 aquaimages.jpg the queen triggerfish has elegant extensions to its fins . file : xanthichthys ringens - pone.0010676.g191.png adult sargassum triggerfish live around reefs and banks , but juveniles live around sargassum . . references . external links .