Charlton Comics

history . early years . in 1931 , italian immigrant john santangelo , sr . , a bricklayer who had started a construction business in white plains , new york , five years earlier , began what became a highly successful business publishing song-lyric magazines out of nearby yonkers , new york . operating in violation of copyright laws , however , he was sentenced in 1934 to a year and a day at new haven county jail in new haven , connecticut , near derby , connecticut , where he and his wife by then lived . in jail , he met waterbury , connecticut , attorney ed levy , with whom he began legitimate publishing in 1935 , acquiring permissions to reproduce lyrics in such magazines as hit parade and song hits . santangelo and levy opened a printing plant in waterbury the following year , and in 1940 founded the t.w.o . charles company , eventually moving its headquarters to derby . archive of '' charlton comics : a brief history '' , the connecticut historical society . original site . webcitation archive . the company 's first comic book was yellowjacket , an anthology of superhero and horror stories launched september 1944 under the imprint frank comunale publications , with ed levy listed as publisher . zoo funnies was published under the imprint children comics publishing ; jack in the box , under frank comunale ; and tnt comics , under charles publishing co . another imprint was frank publications . following the adoption of the charlton comics name in 1946 , the company over the next five years acquired material from freelance editor and comics packager al fago ( brother of former timely comics editor vincent fago ) . charlton additionally published merry comics , cowboy western , the western title tim mccoy , and pictorial love stories . in 1951 , when al fago began as an in-house editor , charlton hired a staff of artists that included its future managing editor , dick giordano . others ( staff or freelance ) who would eventually work with charlton included ; vince alascia , jon d'agostino , sam glanzman , rocke mastroserio , bill molno , charles nicholas and sal trapani . the primary writer was the remarkably prolific joe gill . the company began a wide expansion of its comics line , which would include notoriously gory horror comics ( the principal title being steve ditko 's the thing ! ) . in 1954–55 , it acquired a stable of comic book properties from the defunct superior comics , mainline publications , st . john publications , and most significantly , fawcett publications , which was shutting down its fawcett comics division . charlton continued publishing two of fawcett 's horror books—this magazine is haunted and strange suspense stories—initially using unpublished material from fawcett 's inventory . '' charlton comics at don markstein 's toonopedia notes that charlton 's acquisition included unused artwork from a number of fawcett titles . archived from the original december 6 , 2011 . artistic chores were then handed to ditko , whose moody , individualistic touch came to dominate charlton 's supernatural line . beset by the circulation slump that swept the industry towards the end of the 1950s , haunted struggled for another two years , published bi-monthly until may 1958 . strange suspense stories ran longer , lasting well into the 1960s before giving up the ghost in 1965 . charlton published a wide line of romance titles , particularly after it acquired the fawcett line , which included the romance comics sweethearts , romantic secrets , and romantic story . sweethearts was the comic world 's first monthly romance title nolan , michelle ( 2008 ) . love on the racks : a history of american romance comics . mcfarland & company , inc . pp . 30 , 210 . ( debuting in 1948 ) , and charlton continued publishing it until 1973 . charlton had launched its first original romance title in 1951 , true life secrets , but that series only lasted until 1956 . charlton also picked up a number of western titles from the defunct fawcett comics line , including gabby hayes , lash larue , monte hale , rocky lane . six-gun heroes , tex ritter , tom mix , and western hero . al fago left in the mid-1950s , and was succeeded by his assistant , pat masulli , who remained in the position for ten years . masulli oversaw a plethora of new romance titles , including the long-running i love you , sweetheart diary , brides in love , my secret life , and just married ; and the teen-oriented romance comics teen-age love , teen confessions , and teen-age confidential confessions . superheroes were a minor part of the company . at the beginning , charlton 's main characters were yellowjacket , not to be confused with the later marvel character , and diana the huntress . in the mid-1950s , charlton briefly published a blue beetle title with new and reprinted stories , and in 1956 , several short-lived titles written by superman co-creator jerry siegel , such as mr . muscles and nature boy ( the latter with artist mastroserio ) , and the joe gill-created zaza the mystic . silver age . the company 's most noteworthy period was during the silver age of comic books , which had begun with dc comics ' successful revival of superheroes in 1956 . in march 1960 , charlton 's science fiction anthology title space adventures introduced captain atom , by gill and the future co-creator of marvel comics ' spider-man , steve ditko . ( after the mid-1980s demise of charlton , captain atom would go on to become a stalwart of the dc stable , as would blue beetle , the old fox comics superhero revived by gill and artists bill fraccio and tony tallarico as a campy , comedic character in blue beetle 1 june 1964 . ) charlton also had moderate success with son of vulcan , its answer to marvel 's thor , in mysteries of unexplored worlds 46 ( may 1965 ) . during the silver age , charlton , like marvel and dc , published war comics . notable titles included the '' fightin ' '' line of fightin ' air force , fightin ' army , fightin ' marines , and fightin ' navy ; the '' attack '' line of army attack and submarine attack ; battlefield action ; d-day , u.s . air force comics , and war heroes . though primarily anthology of stories about 20th-century warfare , they included a small number of recurring characters and features , including '' the american eagle '' , american eagle ( 1965 ) at don markstein 's toonopedia . archived from the original on april 4 , 2012 . '' shotgun harker and the chicken '' , '' will franz '' , '' the iron corporal '' and '' captain willy schultz '' . army war heroes and marine war heroes depicted stories based on actual medal of honor recipients . charlton threw itself into the resurgent horror comics genre during this period with such titles as ghostly tales , the many ghosts of doctor graves , and ghost manor . it also created a pair of identical horror-movie magazines : horror monsters ( 1961–1964 ) and mad monsters ( 1961–1965 ) . additionally , charlton produced comics based on monsters featured in motion pictures such as konga , gorgo and reptilicus . charlton continued its commitment to romance comics with such new titles as career girl romances , hollywood romances ( later to change its name to for lovers only ) , and time for love . in 1965 , charlton revived the captain atom character in strange suspense stories numbers 75 , 76 and 77 , reprinting the steve ditko illustrated stories which had originally appeared in space adventures in the early 1960s . retitling the comic , captain atom volume 2 78 ( cover dated dec . 1965 ) , charlton began publishing newly created stories by ditko of the superhero . in 1967 , ditko stopped working at marvel and returned to charlton full-time . after his celebrated stint at marvel , he had grown disenchanted with that company and his spider-man collaborator , writer-editor stan lee . having the hugely popular ditko back helped prompt charlton editor giordano to introduce the company 's '' action hero '' superhero line , with characters including captain atom ; ditko 's the question ; gill and artist pat boyette 's the peacemaker ; gill and company art director frank mclaughlin 's judomaster ; pete morisi 's peter cannon , thunderbolt ; and ditko 's new '' ted kord '' version of the blue beetle . mcavennie '' 1960s '' in dolan , p . 123 : '' after ted kord assumed the scarab as blue beetle in a back-up feature of captain atom 83 , writer/artist steve ditko and co-writer 'd.c . glanzman ' ( who was actually ditko ) launched the blue beetle into his own series . '' the company also developed a reputation as a place for new talent to break into comics ; examples include jim aparo , dennis o'neil and sam grainger . as well , charlton in the late 1960s published some of the first manga in america , in ghost manor and other titles ( thanks to artist sanho kim ) , and artist wayne howard became the industry 's first known cover-credited series creator , with the horror-anthology midnight tales blurbing '' created by wayne howard '' on each issue— '' a declaration perhaps unique in the industry at the time '' . cooke , jon b . , '' lest we forget : celebrating four that got away '' : comic book artist 12 ( march 2001 ) , p . 112 yet by the end of 1967 , charlton 's superhero titles had been cancelled , and licensed properties had become the company 's staples , particularly cartoon characters from hanna-barbera ( the flintstones , the jetsons , top cat , korg : 70,000 b.c . , others ) . charlton took over publication of a number of king features syndicate characters from that company 's short-lived king comics , including beetle bailey , blondie comics , flash gordon , jungle jim , the phantom , and popeye . charlton also published bullwinkle and rocky , and hoppity hooper , based on jay ward productions ' hoppity hooper , and the rocky and bullwinkle show . bronze age . nicola cuti made creative improvements to charlton 's line in the early 1970s , which had been referred to as comics ' 'bronze age ' during which he worked as assistant editor under george wildman , who was occupied primarily with administrative duties . cuti brought mike zeck , among others , into charlton 's roster of artists , and his writing enlivened the ghostly titles , now including ghostly haunts . other bronze age charlton horror titles included haunted , midnight tales , and scary tales . in 1973 , charlton debuted the gothic romance title haunted love , but this same period saw the mass cancellation of almost all of charlton 's vast stable of traditional romance titles , including such long-running series as ; sweethearts , romantic secrets , romantic story , i love you , teen-age love , just married , and teen confessions , all of which dated from the 1950s . thumb in the mid-1970s , there was a brief resurgence of talent , energized by cuti , artist joe staton and the '' cpl gang '' - a group of writer/artist comics fans including john byrne , roger stern , bob layton , and roger slifer , who had all worked on the fanzine cpl ( contemporary pictorial literature ) . charlton began publishing such new titles as e-man , midnight tales and doomsday + 1 . the cpl gang also produced an in-house fanzine called charlton bullseye , which published , among other things , such commissioned but previously unpublished material as the company 's last captain atom story . also during this period , most of charlton 's titles began sporting painted covers . early in 1975 , cuti , already writing freelance for the company in addition to his staff duties , quit to write freelance exclusively for charlton when its line expanded to include black-and-white magazines in addition to the king features and hanna-barbera franchised titles . he was replaced by bill pearson , who became assistant editor after promoting don newton as the new phantom artist and writing scripts for that title . charlton 's black-and-white comics magazines were based upon current television series and aimed at older readers . one of these was the six million dollar man 1–7 ( july 1976 & nbsp ; – august 1977 ) . retailing for 1 , it featured art by neal adams ' studio , continuity associates , as well as some stories by veteran illustrators jack sparling and win mortimer . also published in magazine form were adaptations of the six million dollar man spinoff the bionic woman , space : 1999 , and emergency ! , as well as a comic based on teen heartthrob david cassidy , then starring in the musical sitcom the partridge family . by 1976 , however , most of these titles had been canceled , '' charlton has suspended publication indefinitely '' , the comics journal 29 , october 1976 , p . 14 . and most of the company 's remaining titles went on hiatus during the period january to august 1977 . much of the new talent took the opportunity to move on to marvel and dc . final years . by the 1980s , charlton was in decline . the comic book industry was in a sales slump , struggling to reinvent a profitable distribution and retail system . charlton 's licensed titles lapsed , its aging presses were deteriorating towards uselessness , and the company did not have the resources to replace them . in 1981 , there was yet another attempt at new material , with a comic book version of charlton bullseye serving as a new-talent showcase that actively solicited submissions by comic book fans , '' charlton to publish aspiring pro 's work for free , '' the comics journal 59 ( oct . 1980 ) , p . 14 . and an attempt at new ditko-produced titles . a number of 1970s-era titles were also reprinted under the modern comics imprint and sold in bagged sets in department stores ( in much the same way gold key comics were published under the whitman comics moniker around the same time ) . none of these measures worked , and in 1984 charlton comics suspended publication . '' charlton comics suspends publication , '' the comics journal 94 ( oct . 1984 ) , p . 18 . in 1985 , a final attempt at a revival was spearheaded by new editor t . c . ford with a direct-market charlton bullseye special . '' from the ashes : charlton and harvey to resume publishing this spring , '' the comics journal 97 ( apr . 1985 ) , pp . 15–16 . '' charlton back from the dead , '' the comics journal 101 ( sept . 1985 ) , pp . 22–23 . but later that same year , charlton comics went out of business ; '' charlton goes down for the count , '' the comics journal 103 ( sept . 1985 ) , pp . 10–11 . charlton publications followed suit in 1991 , and its building and presses were demolished in 1999 . editor robin snyder oversaw the sale of some properties to their creators , though the bulk of the rights was purchased by canadian entrepreneur roger broughton . '' charlton rights sold , '' the comics journal 122 ( june 1988 ) , p . 26 . he would produce several reprint titles under the company name of avalon communications and its imprint america 's comics group ( acg for short , broughton having also purchased the rights to the defunct american comics group properties ) , and announced plans to restart charlton comics . this did not occur beyond its publishing a number of reprints and changing his company name to charlton media group . irving , christopher . '' charlton twilight & afterlife : the final days of charlton publications and beyond , '' comic book artist 12 ( mar . 2001 ) , p104-108 . most of charlton 's superhero characters were acquired in 1983 by dc comics , where former charlton editor dick giordano was then managing editor . these '' action hero '' characters were proposed to be used in the landmark watchmen miniseries written by alan moore , but dc then chose to save the characters for other uses . moore instead developed new characters loosely based on them . the charlton characters were incorporated into dc 's main superhero line , starting in the epic crisis on infinite earths miniseries of 1985 . fan revivals . in 2000 , charlton spotlight , a fanzine devoted to charlton , began publication . in 2014 , comics writer mort todd founded a revival imprint named charlton neo , which relied heavily on crowdfunding , and printed stories featuring charlton characters and titles not owned by dc . wickline , dan . '' the charlton arrow & nbsp ; – a tribute to charlton comics '' , bleeding cool , 19 march 2014 , retrieved on 30 may 2014 . in may 2017 , ac comics announced that they had entered into an agreement to bring print versions of charlton neo 's comics to the direct sales comic shop market , starting with charlton arrow 1 in september . the charlton arrow , an anthology series featuring many charlton characters , was the company 's main product and only title sold in stores , but the company ran a number of other titles through mail-order and digital sales . in january 2018 , citing poor sales and '' a variety of financial calamities , '' todd launched a gofundme campaign to '' help save '' the company . see also . list of charlton comics publications charlton bullseye ( fanzine ) . references . external links . comic book artist & nbsp ; 9 , august 2000 : '' the charlton comics story : 1945–1968 '' . online portions : : cooke , jon b . , & christopher irving . '' the charlton empire : a brief history of the derby , connecticut publisher '' , comic book artist . access date 2010-04-27 . webcitation archive . : interview with jim aparo . webcitation archive . comic book artist & nbsp ; 12 , march 2001 : '' the charlton comics story : 1972–1983 '' online portions : : interviews with john byrne ( webcitation archive ) ; joe staton ( webcitation archive ) ; and roger stern ( webcitation archive ) charlton comics at an international catalogue of superheroes . webcitation archive additional on june 11 , 2011 additional made june 15 , 2010 . fbi file on charlton publications deep dish radio podcast on the history of charlton comics with the documentarians making charlton the movie