IDEN

history . the iden project originally began as mirs ( motorola integrated radio system ) in early 1991 . the project was a software lab experiment focused on the utilization of discontiguous spectrum for gsm wireless . gsm systems typically require 24 contiguous voice channels , but the original mirs software platform dynamically selected fragmented channels in the radio frequency ( rf ) spectrum in such a way that a gsm telecom switch could commence a phone call the same as it would in the contiguous channel scenario . operating frequencies . iden is designed and licensed to operate on individual frequencies that may not be contiguous . iden operates on 25 & nbsp ; khz channels , but only occupies 20 & nbsp ; khz in order to provide interference protection via guard bands . by comparison , tdma cellular ( digital amps ) is licensed in blocks of 30 & nbsp ; khz channels , but each emission occupies 40 & nbsp ; khz , and is capable of serving the same number of subscribers per channel as iden . iden uses frequency-division duplexing to transmit and receive signals separately , with transmit and receive bands separated by 39 & nbsp ; mhz , 45 & nbsp ; mhz , or 48 & nbsp ; mhz depending on the frequency band being used . iden supports either three or six interconnect users ( phone users ) per channel , and six dispatch users ( push-to-talk users ) per channel , using time division multiple access . the transmit and receive time slots assigned to each user are deliberately offset in time so that a single user never needs to transmit and receive at the same time . this eliminates the need for a duplexer at the mobile end , since time-division duplexing of rf section usage can be performed . hardware . the first commercial iden handset was motorola 's l3000 , which was released in 1994 . lingo , which stands for link people on the go , was used as a logo for its earlier handsets . most modern iden handsets use sim cards , similar to , but incompatible with gsm handsets ' sim cards . early iden models such as the i1000plus stored all subscriber information inside the handset itself , requiring the data to be downloaded and transferred should the subscriber want to switch handsets . newer handsets using sim technology make upgrading or changing handsets as easy as swapping the sim card . four different sized sim cards exist , '' endeavor '' sims are used only with the i2000 without data , '' condor '' sims are used with the two-digit models ( i95cl , for example ) using a sim with less memory than the three-digit models ( i730 , i860 ) , '' falcon '' sims are used in the three-digit phones , ( i530 , i710 ) and will read the smaller sim for backward compatibility , but some advanced features such as extra contact information is not supported by the older sim cards . there is also the '' falcon 128 '' sim , which is the same as the original '' falcon '' , but doubled in memory size , which is used on new 3 digit phones ( i560 , i930 ) . thumb the interconnect-side of the iden network uses gsm signalling for call set-up and mobility management , with the abis protocol stack modified to support iden 's additional features . motorola has named this modified stack 'mobis ' . each base site requires precise timing and location information to synchronize data across the network . to obtain and maintain this information each base site uses gps satellites to receive a precise timing reference . widen . wideband integrated digital enhanced network , or widen , is a software upgrade developed by motorola and partners for its iden enhanced specialized mobile radio ( or esmr ) wireless telephony protocol . widen allows compatible subscriber units to communicate across four 25 & nbsp ; khz channels combined , for up to 100 kbit/s of bandwidth . the protocol is generally considered a 2.5g wireless cellular technology . history . iden , the platform which widen upgrades , and the protocol on which it is based , was originally introduced by motorola in 1993 , and launched as a commercial network by nextel in the united states in september 1996 . widen was originally anticipated to be a major stepping stone for united states wireless telephone provider nextel communications and its affiliate , nextel partners . however , beginning with the december 2004 announcement of the sprint nextel merger , nextel 's iden network was abandoned in favor of sprint 's cdma network . widen was deactivated on the nextel national network in october 2005 when rebanding efforts in the 800 & nbsp ; mhz band began in an effort to utilize those data channels as a way to handle more cellular phone call traffic on the nextel iden network . the original nextel iden network was finally decommissioned by sprint on june 30 , 2013 and the spectrum refarmed for use in the sprint lte network . subscriber units . the first widen-compatible device to be released was the motorola im240 pc card which allows raw data speeds up to 60 kbit/s . the first widen-compatible telephones are the motorola i850 and i760 , which were released mid-summer 2005 . the recent i850/i760 software upgrade enables widen on both of these phones . the commercial launch of widen came with the release of the motorola i870 on 31 october 2005 , however , most people never got to experience the widen capability in their handsets . widen is also offered in the i930/i920 smartphone , however , sprint shipped these units with widen service disabled . many in the cellular forum communities have found ways using motorola 's own rss software to activate it . widen was available in most places on nextel 's national network . as stated above , it no longer is enabled on the sprint-controlled towers . since the sprint nextel merger the company determined that because sprint 's cdma network was already 3g and going to evdo ( broadband speeds ) , and then evdo rev a , it would be redundant to keep upgrading the iden data network . widen is considered a 2.5g technology . operators . countries which have operating iden networks include united states , canada , colombia , israel , singapore , saudi arabia , el salvador , and guatemala . sprint nextel provided iden service across the united states until its iden network was decommissioned for additional lte network capacity on 30 june 2013 . southernlinc wireless provided iden service across the united states until its iden network was decommissioned for additional lte network capacity on 1 april 2019 . telus provided iden service across most of canada until its iden network was decommissioned on 29 january 2016 . nii holdings provided iden service in brazil until its iden network was decommissioned on 31 march 2018 . . capitalization and pronunciation . motorola originally referred to the platform as widen , choosing to capitalize only the letters representing '' digital enhanced network , '' as it had with iden . however , subsequent promotion from motorola and nextel has indicated that the preferred capitalization is widen . the term has been pronounced , commonly , as a close combination to the words '' why '' and '' den '' , or simply as the word '' widen '' . the former is closer to the original pronunciation of iden , as '' eye '' and '' den '' .