1916 in literature

events . january the journal of negro history is founded by carter g . woodson , father of '' black history '' and '' negro history week '' in the united states . ryūnosuke akutagawa 's short story , the nose , is published in a student magazine . march 1 – the national library of wales completes its transfer to purpose-built premises in aberystwyth . march 22 – j . r . r . tolkien and edith bratt marry at st mary immaculate roman catholic church , warwick , england . they will serve as inspiration for the fictional characters beren and lúthien . tolkien leaves for military service in france at the beginning of june . march 30 – don marquis introduces the characters archy and mehitabel in '' the sun dial '' column in the sun ( new york city ) . archy is a poetry-writing cockroach unable to operate the typewriter shift key ; mehitabel is a cat . april–june – katherine mansfield and john middleton murry live as neighbours to d . h . and frieda lawrence at higher tregerthen , near zennor in cornwall ( england ) . april 24–30 – in the easter rising in ireland , members of the irish republican brotherhood proclaim an irish republic and the irish volunteers and irish citizen army occupy the general post office and other buildings in dublin , before surrendering to the british army . of the seven subsequently executed leaders of the rising , thomas macdonagh , patrick pearse and joseph plunkett are poets and james connolly a balladeer and playwright . the events are the theme of w . b . yeats ' poem '' easter , 1916 '' , first published this september . may 16 – natsume sōseki 's novel light and darkness ( 明暗 , mei an ) begins to be serialized in the tokyo and osaka editions of the newspaper asahi shimbun , but will remain unfinished at the author 's death on december 9 , aged 49 . july 1 the poets w . n . hodgson , will streets , gilbert waterhouse , henry field , alfred ratcliffe , alexander robertson and bernard white are among 19,000 british soldiers killed on the first day on the somme alone . the same day is chosen for the death of fictitious poet cecil valance in alan hollinghurst 's 2011 novel the stranger 's child . the battle of the somme continues until october 18 , during which time american poet alan seeger ( serving with the french ) , irish writer tom kettle , english poet edward wyndham tennant , english short story writer saki and english bowler percy jeeves ( whose name p . g . wodehouse borrowed for his character ) are all killed . the english writer robert graves , novelist stuart cloete , playwright/actor arnold ridley and artist/poet david jones are seriously injured – graves is for a time believed killed . ford madox hueffer suffers concussion and shell shock . a . a . milne and j . r . r . tolkien are invalided out . the english poet siegfried sassoon wins the military cross . the cameron highlander dòmhnall ruadh chorùna composes the scottish gaelic love song an eala bhàn ( the white swan ) in the oral literature tradition . the future u.k . prime minister harold macmillan is wounded in september 's battle of flers–courcelette ; sheltering in a slit trench , he reads aeschylus in the original greek . w . b . yeats makes his fifth and final proposal of marriage to the newly widowed maud gonne in france . july 1–12 – the jersey shore shark attacks of 1916 take place ; these would be the partial inspiration for peter benchley 's novel jaws ( 1974 ) . summer – in the united states , 15-year-old margaret mitchell writes a novella called lost laysen in two notebooks . she will later give the manuscript to a boyfriend and the book remains lost until the mid-1990s . it is published in 1996 . meanwhile , mitchell will go on to write gone with the wind . september – joseph conrad 's novella the shadow line begins to be serialized in the english review ( london ) and the metropolitan magazine ( new york ) . october 6 – the poet perpessicius loses his right arm fighting for the romanians in a skirmish at muratan . october 19 – new premises for the german national library open in leipzig . december – the first of many editions of robert baden-powell 's the wolf cub 's handbook is published . december 29 – james joyce 's semi-autobiographical novel a portrait of the artist as a young man is first published complete in book form , in new york by b . w . huebsch . new books . fiction . sholom aleichem – in america ( אין אַמעריקע , in amerike ) , second part of motl , peysi the cantor 's son : the writings of an orphan boy ( מאָטל פּייסי דעם חזנס ; כתבֿים פֿון אַ ייִנגל אַ יתום , sherwood anderson – windy mcpherson 's son ruby m . ayres the road that bends paper roses a man of his word the year after henri barbusse – under fire ( le feu ) arnold bennett – these twain e.f . benson david blaize mike the freaks of mayfair adrien bertrand – l'appel du sol john edward bruce – the awakening of hezekiah jones mary grant bruce – captain jim thomas burke – limehouse nights ( including '' beryl and the croucher '' , '' the chink and the child '' and '' gina of the chinatown '' ) gilbert cannan – mendel : a story of youth ethel m . dell – the bars of iron alfred döblin – the three leaps of wang lun ( die drei sprünge des wang-lun , dated 1915 ) ronald firbank – inclinations walter flex – der wanderer zwischen beiden welten ( the wanderer between two worlds ) charlotte perkins gilman – with her in ourland elinor glyn – the career of katherine bush sarah grand – the winged victory louis hemon – maria chapdelaine hermann hesse – schön ist die jugend william dean howells – the leatherwood god james joyce – a portrait of the artist as a young man franz kafka – the metamorphosis ( die verwandlung , first book publication ) frigyes karinthy please , sir ! ( tanár úr , kérem ) voyage to faremido ( utazás faremidóba ) grace king – the pleasant ways of st . medard ring lardner – you know me al ada leverson – love at second sight benito lynch – the caranchos of florida i . i . mironescu – sandu hurmuzel ( short stories ) george moore – the brook kerith : a syrian story mori ōgai – takasebune ( 高瀬舟 the boat on the takase river ) baroness orczy – leatherface dorothy richardson – backwater berta ruck – in another girl 's shoes ruth sawyer – seven miles to arden may sinclair – tasker jevons rabindranath tagore – the home and the world ( ঘরে বাইরে , ghôre baire ) booth tarkington – seventeen ( tarkington novel ) mark twain – the mysterious stranger ( completed posthumously ) eduard vilde – mäeküla piimamees ( the milkman of mäeküla ) edgar wallace a debt discharged the tomb of ts'in mrs humphry ward – lady connie h . g . wells – mr . britling sees it through francis brett young – the iron age . children and young people . l . frank baum rinkitink in oz mary louise ( as edith van dyne ) frances hodgson burnett - the little hunchback zia edgar rice burroughs – the beasts of tarzan dorothy canfield fisher – understood betsy may gibbs – gumnut babies . drama . jacinto benavente – campo de armiño ( ermine field ) hall caine the prime minister the iron hand ( also known as the call of the king ) luigi chiarelli – la maschera e il volto : grottesco in tre atti ( the mask and the face ) ernest fenollosa and ezra pound ( translated & edited ) – certain noble plays of japan ( published ) susan glaspell – trifles harley granville-barker – farewell to the theatre sacha guitry – let 's make a dream walter c . hackett - the barton mystery franz kafka – the warden of the tomb ( der gruftwächter ; writing commenced ) jack london – the acorn planter : a california forest play gregorio martínez sierra – el reino de dios ( the kingdom of god ) allan monkhouse – night watches : a comedy in one act eden philpotts – the farmer 's wife sophie treadwell – claws w . b . yeats – at the hawk 's well ( private performance ) . poetry . robert frost – mountain interval yvan goll – requiem pour les morts de l'europe joseph lee – ballads of battle amy lowell – men , women , and ghosts antonio machado – campos de castilla ( revised edition ) charlotte mew – the farmer 's bride ezra pound – lustra carl sandburg – chicago poems muriel stuart – christ at carnival and other poems katharine tynan – holy war gilbert waterhouse – rail-head and other poems ( published posthumously ) w . b . yeats – '' easter , 1916 '' ( written ) sergei yesenin – радуница ( radunitsa , ritual for the dead ) . non-fiction . max aitken – canada in flanders hall caine – our girls : their work for the war max dvořák – katechismus der denkmalpflege ( catechism of historical preservation ) ferdinand de saussure ( posthumous ) – course in general linguistics albert einstein – '' die grundlage der allgemeinen relativitätstheorie ] '' ( the groundwork of general relativity ) , annalen der physik 49 ernest fenollosa and ezra pound – noh , or , accomplishment : a study of the classical stage of japan israel gollancz ( ed . ) – a book of homage to shakespeare madison grant – the passing of the great race ellen la motte – the backwash of war sydney loch ( as sydney de loghe ) – the straits impregnable ( military autobiography ; 1st edn published as fiction ) sir oliver lodge – raymond ; or , life and death , with evidence for survival of memory and affection after death ezra pound – gaudier-brzeska : a memoir mrs humphry ward – england 's effort : six letters to an american friend frances garnet wolseley , 2nd viscountess wolseley – women on the land . births . january 10 – bernard binlin dadié , ivorien author and politician ( died 2019 ) february 15 – ian ballantine , american publisher ( died 1995 ) march 4 giorgio bassani , italian author ( died 2000 ) hans eysenck , german-born england-based psychologist ( died 1997 ) april 12 – beverly cleary , american children 's author april 15 – helene hanff , american writer and critic ( died 1997 ) may 12 – albert murray , american critic , novelist and biographer ( died 2013 ) may 21 – harold robbins , american novelist ( died 1997 ) may 28 – walker percy , american novelist ( died 1990 ) june 16 – barbara skelton , english fiction writer , memoirist and literary figure ( died 1996 ) july 14 – natalia ginzburg , italian author ( died 1991 ) august 28 – c . wright mills , american sociologist ( died 1962 ) september 13 – roald dahl , welsh-born children 's author ( died 1990 ) september 14 – eric bentley , english-born american drama critic ( died 2020 ) september 17 – mary stewart ( mary rainbow ) , english romantic suspense novelist ( died 2014 ) september 19 – giles romilly , english journalist ( died 1967 ) september 25 – jessica anderson , australian novelist and short story writer ( died 2010 ) september 27 – s . yizhar ( yizhar smilansky ) , israeli author ( died 2006 ) october 3 – james herriot ( james alfred wight ) , english writer and veterinary surgeon ( died 1995 ) october 10 – david gascoyne , english surrealist poet ( died 2001 ) october 12 – alice childress , african american playwright , actress and young-adult novelist ( died 1994 ) november 7 – ian niall ( john kincaid mcneillie ) , scottish novelist and non-fiction writer ( died 2002 ) november 18 – peter weiss , german writer , painter and filmmaker ( died 1982 ) november 24 – james pope-hennessy , english biographer and travel writer ( murdered 1974 ) december 14 – shirley jackson , american novelist and short story writer ( died 1965 ) december 17 – penelope fitzgerald ( penelope knox ) , english novelist ( died 2000 ) . deaths . january 27 – c . morton horne , irish writer and performer ( killed in action , born 1885 ) february 6 – rubén darío , nicaraguan poet ( born 1867 ) february 12 – john townsend trowbridge , american author ( born 1827 ) february 28 – henry james , american-born novelist ( born 1843 ) april 26 – mário de sá-carneiro , portuguese novelist and poet ( suicide , born 1890 ) may 3 – patrick pearse , poet and irish nationalist leader ( executed , born 1879 ) may 13 – sholom aleichem , ukrainian-born humorist ( born 1859 ) may 28 ( may 15 o.s . ) – ivan franko , ukrainian writer , translator and political activist ( born 1856 ) may 31 – gorch fock ( johann wilhelm kinau ) , german poet and novelist ( killed in action , born 1880 ) june 7 – émile faguet , french critic ( born 1847 ) july 1 w . n . hodgson ( edward melbourne ) , english war poet ( killed in action , born 1893 ) gilbert waterhouse , english architect and war poet ( killed in action , born 1883 ) august 8 – lily braun ( amalie von kretschmann ) , german feminist writer ( born 1865 ) august 27 – petar kočić , bosnian novelist and politician ( born 1877 ) september 22 – edward wyndham tennant , english war poet ( killed in action , born 1897 ) october 7 – james whitcomb riley , american poet ( born 1849 ) october 21 – olindo guerrini , italian poet ( born 1845 ) october 25 – john todhunter , irish poet and dramatist ( born 1839 ) november 14 – saki ( h . h . munro ) , english short-story writer ( killed in action , born 1870 ) november 15 – molly elliot seawell , american novelist ( born 1860 ) november 22 – jack london , american novelist ( born 1876 ) november 27 – emile verhaeren , belgian symbolist poet ( born 1855 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : carl gustaf verner von heidenstam ( swedish ) . references . see also . world war i in literature