Women's American football

leagues . leagues play american football unless otherwise noted . united states . iconwfa premier league of texas ( iwfa ) ( 8 on 8 ) women 's football alliance ( wfa ) united states women 's football league ( uswfl ) legends football league ( x league - formerly legends football league ) women 's arena football league ( wafl ) women 's national football conference ( wnfc ) xtreme female football league of texas ( xffl ) ( 8 on 8 ) women 's tackle football league ( wtfl ) utah girls football league ( gfl ) ( youth/high school level ) . canada . maritime women 's football league ( mwfl ) ( canadian football ) western women 's canadian football league ( wwcfl ) ( canadian football ) . australia . female gridiron league of queensland ladies football league ladies gridiron league women 's gridiron leagues of australia gridiron west ( wa ) . europe . lfl europe ( lfl ) ( debut 2015 ) afboe damenfootball ( afl division ladies ) ( debut 2000 ) bafa womens ( bafa womens ) . finland . naisten vaahteraliiga . germany . damenbundesliga 2 . damenbundesliga aufbauliga nrw . mexico . football xtremo femenil asociación de football femenil equipado liga mexicana de football lingerie pretty girls football league liga iberoamericana de bikini football women 's football league . us defunct leagues . women 's professional football league ( wpfl ) 1965-1973 national women 's football league ( nwfl ) 1974-1988 western states women 's professional football league ( wswpfl ) 1978-1980 women 's tackle football association ( wtfa ) 1988-1990 women 's affiliate football conference ( wafc ) 2002 united women 's football league ( uwfl ) 2002 american football women 's league ( afwl ) 2002-2003 women 's american football league ( wafl ) 2001-2003 women 's football association ( wfa ) 2002-2003 ladies tackle football league ( ltfl ) ( central california , disbanded circa 2004 ? ) women 's football league ( wfl ) 2002-2007 women 's professional football league ( wpfl ) 1999-2008 national women 's football association ( nwfa ) 2000-2009 independent women 's football league ( iwfl ) 2001-2018 . women in college and professional football . of the women who have seen action in men 's college and pro football , almost all have been in special teams positions that are roughing the kicker . the first professional player was a placekick holder ( a traditionally trivial position usually occupied by a person who holds another position on the team ) , while the best known female college football players were all placekickers , with all having primarily played women 's soccer prior to converting . patricia palinkas is on record as being the first female professional football player , having played for the orlando panthers of the atlantic coast football league in 1970 . palinkas was a placekick holder for her placekicker husband . associated press ( 1970-09-04 ) . '' first woman to earn place on pro grid team is also suspended . '' retrieved 2010-12-25 . on october 18 , 1997 , liz heaston became the first woman to play and score in a college football game , kicking two extra points . prior to this game , female athletes at duke and louisville had come close to playing in a game but did not . in 2001 , ashley martin became the second female athlete to score in a college football game , this time in the ncaa . in 2003 , katie hnida became the first woman to score in a ncaa division i-a game . she accomplished this as placekicker for the university of new mexico lobos on august 30 , 2003 . ( 2-2 pats , new mexico vs . texas state , 8/30/03 ) she later became the second professional player , when she signed with the fort wayne firehawks . julie harshbarger , a placekicker for numerous chicago-based continental indoor football league teams , became the first female player to win a most valuable player award in an otherwise all-male league in 2014 . by kicking five field goals that season , she earned the title of special teams player of the year , leading all kickers in the league in scoring ; with a career spanning seven seasons , harshbarger 's career was the longest documented of any woman playing in a predominantly men 's professional league . in 2020 , sarah fuller became the first woman to play in a power five football game when she took the opening kickoff of the second half of the commodores ' game against the missouri tigers with a 30 yard squib kick on november 28 , 2020 . ( it is important to note that the term '' power five '' was not in use when katie hnida became the first woman to score in an ncaa division i-a game in 2003 ; hnida played at the mountain west conference , which did not have automatic qualifying status in the bowl championship series . ) jennifer welter became the first female skill position player at the male professional level by playing as a running back in the texas revolution in 2014 . to date , no women have ever tried to play a line position above the high school level . holley mangold , whose brother nick played several years in the nfl and who herself played as a lineswoman in high school , declined to further pursue football in college , fearing she had no chance to play professionally as a woman ; she later went on to become an olympic weightlifter . brittanee jacobs is the first female football coach at the collegiate level . she helped coach safeties at central methodist university during the 2012 season . welter became the first female coach at the professional level when she took a preseason position with the arizona cardinals in 2015 ; a year later , kathryn smith , who had spent several years as a front office assistant , took a quality control coaching position with the buffalo bills , making her the first permanent female coach in national football league history . in 2020 , callie brownson became the first woman to coach an nfl position group in a regular-season game when she filled in for the cleveland browns tight ends coach drew petzing . . international competition . there is no team officially . but the world governing body for american football associations , the international federation of american football ( ifaf ) , held the first ever women 's world cup in stockholm , sweden , in 2010 . six nations participated in the inaugural event : austria , canada , finland , germany , sweden , and the united states . the united states won the gold by beating canada , 66-0 . the women 's world championship is on the 4 year schedule with other international games . the 2013 world championship , in finland , was held from 30 june 2013 to 7 july 2013 . the usa won gold again , beating sweden 84-0 and germany 107-7 in order to make it to the gold medal match with canada , whom they beat 64-0 . in the 2017 ifaf women 's world championship , held in canada , the six teams invited were ; australia , canada , finland , great britain , mexico and the united states . the us continued their dominance , claiming gold , while canada and mexico won silver and bronze respectively . ifaf has confirmed palma , located on the spanish island of mallorca , spain as host for 2021 ifaf flag football world championship from october 6 to 10 2021 it will be the first time spain has staged the world championships which have been held since 1998 . normally conducted every two years , denmark was scheduled to host the 2020 edition only for it to be cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic . . see also . list of female american football players powderpuff ( sports ) . references . external links . '' women 's professional football '' history to 2000 stuart kantor , profootballresearchers.com ( pdf ) '' history of women 's football ( so far ) '' central florida anarchy history of women 's football sacramento sirens the first women 's football shirt website women 's football forums official german website for league play '' women playing american football in north america and internationally '' ohio northern university