Albert Ghiorso

biography . early life . ghiorso was born in california on july 15 , 1915 , of italian and spanish ancestry . he grew up in alameda , california . as a teenager , he built radio circuitry and earned a reputation for establishing radio contacts at distances that outdid the military . he received his bs in electrical engineering from the university of california , berkeley in 1937 . after graduation , he worked for reginald tibbets , a prominent amateur radio operator who operated a business supplying radiation detectors to the government . ghiorso 's ability to develop and produce these instruments , as well as a variety of electronic tasks , brought him into contact with the nuclear scientists at the university of california radiation laboratory at berkeley , in particular glenn seaborg . during a job in which he was to install an intercom at the lab , he met two secretaries , one of whom married seaborg . the other , wilma belt , became albert 's wife of 60+ years . ghiorso was raised in a devout christian family , but later left the religion and became an atheist . however , he still identified with christian ethics . schmieder , robert w . , albert ghiorso – notes for memoirs , january 2010 seaborg , glenn theodore , et al . , transuranium people : the inside story , imperial college press , 2000 . wartime research . in the early 1940s , seaborg moved to chicago to work on the manhattan project . he invited ghiorso to join him , and for the next four years ghiorso developed sensitive instruments for detecting the radiation associated with nuclear decay , including spontaneous fission . one of ghiorso 's breakthrough instruments was a 48-channel pulse height analyzer , which enabled him to identify the energy , and therefore the source , of the radiation . during this time they discovered two new elements ( 95 , americium and 96 , curium ) , although publication was withheld until after the war . . new elements . after the war , seaborg and ghiorso returned to berkeley , where they and colleagues used the 60 '' crocker cyclotron to produce elements of increasing atomic number by bombarding exotic targets with helium ions . in experiments during 1949-1950 , they produced and identified elements 97 ( berkelium ) and 98 ( californium ) . in 1953 , in a collaboration with argonne lab , ghiorso and collaborators sought and found elements 99 ( einsteinium ) and 100 ( fermium ) , identified by their characteristic radiation in dust collected by airplanes from the first thermonuclear explosion ( the ivy mike ) . in 1955 , the group used the cyclotron to produce 17 atoms of element 101 ( mendelevium ) , the first new element to be discovered atom-by-atom . the recoil technique invented by ghiorso was crucial to obtaining an identifiable signal from individual atoms of the new element . in the mid-1950s it became clear that to extend the periodic chart any further , a new accelerator would be needed , and the berkeley heavy ion linear accelerator ( hilac ) was built , with ghiorso in charge . that machine was used in the discovery of elements 102-106 ( 102 , nobelium ; 103 , lawrencium ; 104 , rutherfordium ; 105 , dubnium and 106 , seaborgium ) , each produced and identified on the basis of only a few atoms . the discovery of each successive element was made possible by the development of innovative techniques in robotic target handling , fast chemistry , efficient radiation detectors , and computer data processing . the 1972 upgrade of the hilac to the superhilac provided higher intensity ion beams , which was crucial to producing enough new atoms to enable detection of element 106 . with increasing atomic number , the experimental difficulties of producing and identifying a new element increase significantly . in the 1970s and 1980s , resources for new element research at berkeley were diminishing , but the gsi laboratory at darmstadt , germany , under the leadership of peter armbruster and with considerable resources , was able to produce and identify elements 107-109 ( 107 , bohrium ; 108 , hassium and 109 , meitnerium ) . in the early 1990s , the berkeley and darmstadt groups made a collaborative attempt to create element 110 . experiments at berkeley were unsuccessful , but eventually elements 110-112 ( 110 , darmstadtium ; 111 , roentgenium and 112 , copernicium ) were identified at the darmstadt laboratory . subsequent work at the jinr laboratory at dubna , led by yuri oganessian and a russian-american team of scientists , was successful in identifying elements 113-118 ( 113 , nihonium ; 114 , flerovium ; 115 , moscovium ; 116 , livermorium ; 117 , tennessine and 118 , oganesson ) , thereby completing the seventh row of the periodic table of the elements . inventions . ghiorso invented numerous techniques and machines for isolating and identifying heavy elements atom-by-atom . he is generally credited with implementing the multichannel analyzer and the technique of recoil to isolate reaction products , although both of these were significant extensions of previously understood concepts . his concept for a new type of accelerator , the omnitron , is acknowledged to have been a brilliant advance that probably would have enabled the berkeley lab to discover numerous additional new elements , but the machine was never built , a victim of the evolving political landscape of the 1970s in the u.s . that de-emphasized basic nuclear research and greatly expanded research on environmental , health , and safety issues . partially as a result of the failure to build the omnitron , ghiorso ( together with colleagues bob main and others ) conceived the joining of the hilac and the bevatron , which he called the bevalac . this combination machine , an ungainly articulation across the steep slope at the rad lab , provided heavy ions at gev energies , thereby enabling development of two new fields of research : '' high-energy nuclear physics , '' meaning that the compound nucleus is sufficiently hot to exhibit collective dynamical effects , and heavy ion therapy , in which high-energy ions are used to irradiate tumors in cancer patients . both of these fields have expanded into activities in many laboratories and clinics worldwide . albert ghiorso , robert m . main , and bob h . smith , '' the omnitron : a versatile medium-energy synchrotron for the acceleration of light and heavy ions '' , proceedings of the international conference on isochronous cyclotrons , gatlinburg , tennessee , 1966 , ieee transactions on nuclear science , ns-13 , no . 4 , august 1966 , p . 280–287 . later life . in his later years , ghiorso continued research toward finding superheavy elements , fusion energy , and innovative electron beam sources . he was a non-participating co-author of the experiments in 1999 that gave evidence of elements 116 and 118 , which later turned out to be a case of scientific fraud perpetrated by the first author , victor ninov . he also had brief research interests in the free quark experiment of william fairbank of stanford , in the discovery of technetium , and in the electron disk accelerator , among others . legacy . albert ghiorso is credited with having co-discovered the following elements americium ca . 1945 ( element 95 ) curium in 1944 ( element 96 ) berkelium in 1949 ( element 97 ) californium in 1950 ( element 98 ) einsteinium in 1952 ( element 99 ) fermium in 1953 ( element 100 ) mendelevium in 1955 ( element 101 ) nobelium in 1958–59 ( element 102 ) lawrencium in 1961 ( element 103 ) rutherfordium in 1969 ( element 104 ) dubnium in 1970 ( element 105 ) seaborgium in 1974 ( element 106 ) ghiorso personally selected some of the names recommended by his group for the new elements . his original name for element 105 ( hahnium ) was changed by the international union of pure and applied chemistry ( iupac ) to dubnium , to recognize the contributions of the laboratory at dubna , russia , in the search for trans-fermium elements . his recommendation for element 106 , seaborgium , was accepted only after extensive debate about naming an element after a living person . in 1999 , evidence for two superheavy elements ( livermorium and oganesson ) was published by a group in berkeley . the discovery group intended to propose the name ghiorsium for element 118 , but eventually the data were found to have been tampered and in 2002 the claims were withdrawn . ghiorso 's lifetime output comprised about 170 technical papers , most published in the physical review . ghiorso is famous among his colleagues for his endless stream of creative '' doodles , '' which define an art form suggestive of fractals . he also developed a state-of-the-art camera for birdwatching , and was a constant supporter of environmental causes and organizations . several obituaries are available online , and a full-length biography is in preparation . . notes . references . images in the lbnl archives