Wireless access point

connections . image : routerboard 112 with u.fl-rsma pigtail and r52 minipci wi-fi card.jpg thumb embedded routerboard 112 with u.fl-rsma pigtail and r52 mini pci wi-fi card widely used by wireless internet service providers ( wisps ) across the world an ap connects directly to a wired local area network , typically ethernet , and the ap then provides wireless connections using wireless lan technology , typically wi-fi , for other devices to use that wired connection . aps support the connection of multiple wireless devices through their one wired connection . wireless data standards . there are many wireless data standards that have been introduced for wireless access point and wireless router technology . new standards have been created to accommodate the increasing need for faster wireless connections . some wireless routers provide backward compatibility with older wi-fi technologies as many devices were manufactured for use with older standards . 802.11a 802.11b 802.11g 802.11n 802.11ac 802.11ax , also known as wi-fi 6 . wireless access point vs . ad hoc network . some people confuse wireless access points with wireless ad hoc networks . an ad hoc network uses a connection between two or more devices without using a wireless access point ; the devices communicate directly when in range . because setup is easy and does not require an access point , an ad hoc network is used in situations such as a quick data exchange or a multiplayer video game . due to its peer-to-peer layout , ad hoc wi-fi connections are similar to connections available using bluetooth . ad hoc connections are generally not recommended for a permanent installation . internet access via ad hoc networks , using features like windows ' internet connection sharing , may work well with a small number of devices that are close to each other , but ad hoc networks do not scale well . internet traffic will converge to the nodes with direct internet connection , potentially congesting these nodes . for internet-enabled nodes , access points have a clear advantage , with the possibility of having a wired lan . limitations . it is generally recommended that one ieee 802.11 ap should have , at a maximum , 10-25 clients . however , the actual maximum number of clients that can be supported can vary significantly depending on several factors , such as type of aps in use , density of client environment , desired client throughput , etc . the range of communication can also vary significantly , depending on such variables as indoor or outdoor placement , height above ground , nearby obstructions , other electronic devices that might actively interfere with the signal by broadcasting on the same frequency , type of antenna , the current weather , operating radio frequency , and the power output of devices . network designers can extend the range of aps through the use of repeaters , which amplify a radio signal , and reflectors , which only bounce it . in experimental conditions , wireless networking has operated over distances of several hundred kilometers . most jurisdictions have only a ieee 802.11 channelsandfreqs legally available for use by wireless networks . usually , adjacent aps will use different frequencies ( channels ) to communicate with their clients in order to avoid interference between the two nearby systems . wireless devices can '' listen '' for data traffic on other frequencies , and can rapidly switch from one frequency to another to achieve better reception . however , the limited number of frequencies becomes problematic in crowded downtown areas with tall buildings using multiple aps . in such an environment , signal overlap becomes an issue causing interference , which results in signal droppage and data errors . wireless networking lags wired networking in terms of increasing bandwidth and throughput . while ( as of 2013 ) high-density 256-qam ( turboqam ) modulation , 3-antenna wireless devices for the consumer market can reach sustained real-world speeds of some 240 mbit/s at 13 m behind two standing walls ( nlos ) depending on their nature or 360 mbit/s at 10 m line of sight or 380 mbit/s at 2 m line of sight ( ieee 802.11ac ) or 20 to 25 mbit/s at 2 m line of sight ( ieee 802.11g ) , wired hardware of similar cost reaches closer to 1000 mbit/s up to specified distance of 100 m with twisted-pair cabling in optimal conditions ( cat‑5 or better cabling with gigabit ethernet ) . one impediment to increasing the speed of wireless communications comes from wi-fi 's use of a shared communications medium : thus , two stations in infrastructure mode that are communicating with each other even over the same ap must have each and every frame transmitted twice : from the sender to the ap , then from the ap to the receiver . this approximately halves the effective bandwidth , so an ap is only able to use somewhat less than half the actual over-the-air rate for data throughput . thus a typical 54 mbit/s wireless connection actually carries tcp/ip data at 20 to 25 mbit/s . users of legacy wired networks expect faster speeds , and people using wireless connections keenly want to see the wireless networks catch up . by 2012 , 802.11n based access points and client devices have already taken a fair share of the marketplace and with the ieee 802.11n-2009 inherent problems integrating products from different vendors are less prevalent . security . wireless access has special security considerations . many wired networks base the security on physical access control , trusting all the users on the local network , but if wireless access points are connected to the network , anybody within range of the ap ( which typically extends farther than the intended area ) can attach to the network . the most common solution is wireless traffic encryption . modern access points come with built-in encryption . the first generation encryption scheme , wep , proved easy to crack ; the second and third generation schemes , wpa and wpa2 , are considered secure if a strong enough password or passphrase is used . some aps support hotspot style authentication using radius and other authentication servers . opinions about wireless network security vary widely . for example , in a 2008 article for wired magazine , bruce schneier asserted the net benefits of open wi-fi without passwords outweigh the risks , a position supported in 2014 by peter eckersley of the electronic frontier foundation . the opposite position was taken by nick mediati in an article for pc world , in which he advocates that every wireless access point should be protected with a password . . see also . femtocell – a local-area base station using cellular network standards such as umts , rather than wi-fi homeplug – wired lan technology that has a few elements in common with wi-fi lightweight access point protocol – used to manage a large set of aps list of router firmware projects wi-fi array – system of multiple aps wi-fi direct – a wi-fi standard that enables devices to connect with each other without requiring a ( hardware ) wireless access point and to communicate at typical wi-fi speeds wimax – wide-area wireless standard that has a few elements in common with wi-fi . references .