The Tripods

synopsis . the story of the tripods is a variation on post-apocalyptic literature , wherein humanity has been enslaved by '' tripods '' & nbsp ; — gigantic three-legged walking machines , piloted by unseen alien entities ( later identified as '' masters '' ) . human society is largely pastoral , with few habitations larger than villages , and what little industry exists is conducted under the watchful presence of the tripods . lifestyle is reminiscent of the middle ages , but small artifacts from the modern age are still used , such as watches . humans are controlled from the age of 14 by implants called '' caps '' , which suppress curiosity and creativity . some people , whose minds are broken by the caps , become vagrants . according to the city of gold and lead , masters begin to believe that humans should be capped at an earlier age '' because some humans , in the year or two before they are capped , become rebellious and act against the masters '' , but this can not be done , because capping must wait until the braincase has stopped growing . . series . the white mountains ( 1967 ) . life goes on largely as it had in the pre-industrial era , except that all adult humans are subject to tripod control . protagonist will parker , a thirteen-year-old boy living in the ( fictional ) english village of wherton , is looking forward to the next '' capping day '' , until a chance meeting with a mysterious fake-capped man named ozymandias prompts him to discover a world beyond the tripods ' control . he is accompanied by his cousin henry and later by a french teenager named jean-paul deliet , nicknamed '' beanpole '' . the novel climaxes with henry and beanpole discovering that earlier , when will was captured by a tripod , he was unknowingly implanted with a tracking device . when henry and beanpole remove the device , a nearby tripod attacks them , but the boys defeat the tripod and eventually join the resistance , located in the eponymous white mountains . ( 1967 ) . after a year in the white mountains , the resistance charges will , beanpole , and a german boy , fritz , to infiltrate a tripod city by competing in a regional sporting exhibition . will , a boxer , and fritz , a runner , win their respective contests , while beanpole fails to win in the jumping events . the winners are taken to the tripod city in a pressurised dome astride a river . inside the city , the boys discover the tripods ' operators , whom they refer to as the '' masters '' . human males are slaves inside the cities , while beautiful females are killed and preserved for the masters to admire . slaves are furnished with breathing masks to survive the aliens ' atmosphere , but are rapidly exhausted by the stronger artificial gravity and must therefore be periodically replaced . although fritz is abused by his master , will is treated as a privileged pet by his . eventually , will 's master reveals a plan to replace the earth 's atmosphere with the masters ' toxic air to enable full control of the earth . when the master finds will 's diary , will kills him to maintain the secret . with the assistance of beanpole and fritz , who temporarily stays behind to maintain will ’ s alibi , he escapes and returns to the white mountains with beanpole . the story 's title refers to the gold colour prevalent in the masters ' cities , as well as the leaden weight of the increased gravity on the human slaves . ( 1968 ) . will and fritz travel to eastern europe , the caucasus , and the middle east to organize resistance against the tripods . the resistance , having ambushed a tripod and captured a master , discover that alcohol has a strong sleep effect on them , and use this knowledge to simultaneously attack their cities . having introduced alcohol into the aliens ' city water systems , two raiding groups kill the masters by forcing open airlocks and exposing the unconscious aliens to earth 's atmosphere ; but the attack on the last city ( located in central america ) fails . a secondary plan is undertaken using hot air balloons and newly developed bombs . the attack is initially unsuccessful as the timers on the bombs cause them to detonate either before making contact with the dome of the city , or after the bomb has fallen clear . henry jumps from his balloon onto the city 's domed roof and holds the bomb in place , sacrificing himself but shattering the dome . earth 's atmosphere kills the masters , and henry is remembered as a hero . several years later , the masters ' atmosphere-seeding spaceship arrives and destroys the remains of their cities , then leaves – presumably since the cities contained '' star maps '' which showed the location of the masters ' home world , also to prevent the humans from reverse engineering their technology – although beanpole notes that they have already learned much from the cities . modern human technology , which was halted during the masters ' rule is rediscovered rapidly , including the theory of space travel . the saga ends with the resistance leader julius being deposed . as a result , the alliance built during the resistance falls apart , with nationalistic hostilities appearing , each country going their separate ways in contrast to julius ' efforts to unite the world . will , beanpole , and fritz reunite as a tribute to julius , to work towards establishing a better world . ( 1988 ) . when the tripods came is a prequel written twenty years after the publication of the original trilogy . the plot follows the description of the conquest given in the second book of the main trilogy . fearing the technological potential of humanity , the so-called '' masters '' , unable to defeat humanity in a conventional war , hypnotise people through a television show called the trippy show , later using caps to control them permanently . as in the original trilogy , the narrator of when the tripods came is a young english boy . as society slowly falls under the control of the masters , he and his family escape to switzerland , which has mounted the longest-lasting resistance . when the swiss are eventually enslaved , the narrator and his family establish the '' white mountains '' resistance movement of the original trilogy . editions . editions have been published by hamish hamilton ( uk first edition ) simon & schuster ( usa first edition ) collier books e . p . dutton thorndike press knight books turtleback books beaver books audible ( store ) ( audiobook ) the series has been translated into arabic , dutch , danish , finnish , french , german , hebrew , persian , spanish , greek , and mandarin chinese ( taiwan ) . comic books . multiple graphic adaptations have been produced , notably including : boys ' life , the monthly magazine of the boy scouts of america , serialised all three books in the trilogy from may 1981 to august 1986 . artist frank bolle drew the single page black and white proofs , which were then inked by another person . in 1985 , the bbc initiated beeb , the bbc junior television magazine , and started to present in picture strip form additional adventures of will , henry , and beanpole on their way to the white mountains , starting at some unspecified point during the fourth episode of the first bbc serial as the trio pass through ruined paris , and then heading off at a tangent to the television version . from issue 6 , the boys were accompanied on their journey by a young woman named fizzio , a character original to the strip . the strips were drawn by john m . burns and in each issue , they consisted of three pages ; the first two in colour and the third in black and white . the storyline was never concluded as beeb ceased publication after only 20 issues . masters were one of the species detailed in barlowe 's guide to extraterrestrials . television series . the television version of the tripods was jointly produced by the bbc in the united kingdom and the seven network in australia . the music soundtrack was written by ken freeman . the series was noted for being one of the first to feature computer generated graphics and special effects . series one of the tripods , broadcast in 1984 , which had 13 half-hour episodes written by the well-known author of many radio plays alick rowe , covers the first book , the white mountains ; the 12-episode second series ( 1985 ) covers the city of gold and lead . although a television script had been written for the third series , it never went into production . the first series was released on both vhs and dvd . the bbc released tripods & nbsp ; — the complete series 1 & 2 on dvd in march 2009 . . comparison with the novels . when the bbc made the television series of the tripods in the 1980s , they departed from christopher 's description of the masters . in the television series , the masters somewhat resemble the tripods they drive . this makes the tripods seem much more like mecha , similar to those described in the war of the worlds , than purely eccentric vehicles . in the bbc serial , the masters did not need to eat , sleep or drink . additionally , they were not the rulers of the city , but were , in turn , under the rule of beings made of pure energy , known as cognoscs . the masters came from a planet named trion that was in the center of a triple star system . the method by which the masters name themselves is also different . rather than having names , they are simply called by their address . will 's master is called west avenue 4 , sector 6 , level 8 , or west 468 . the masters in the bbc production did not breathe green air and did not prefer the high gravity and high temperature of those in the book , since these would have been extremely difficult or expensive to recreate onscreen at the time . their treatment of the slaves , rather than being harsh and thoughtless , was reasonable to the point of being friendly , with luxuries provided for them . to avoid an overuse of the mechanical tripods , the producers invented a new faction , the '' black guards '' , as a human police force with the task to enforce the will of the masters . they served as a more immediate threat for will , his friends and the resistance . footnotes . references . external links . tripod books at simon & schuster website fr : john christopher trilogie les tripodes