1996 in literature

events . february – andrzej pilipiuk 's debut short story hiena ( hyena ) in fenix magazine introduces his antihero jakub wędrowycz . july 1 – the german orthography reform of 1996 is agreed internationally . july 8 – harper lee 's to kill a mockingbird , mark twain 's huckleberry finn and 30 other books are struck from an english reading list in lindale , texas , as they '' conflict with the values of the community . '' herbert n . foerstel , banned in the usa , greenwood press , 2002 , p . 233 . july 11 – as requested by nelson mandela , benjamin zephaniah hosts the president 's two nations concert at london 's royal albert hall . life at the hall – happy birthday , nelson mandela . accessed 9 december 2014 . october 3 – the first performance is held in new york of eve ensler 's episodic feminist play the vagina monologues . unknown dates in the uk , the first orange prize for fiction for female novelists goes to helen dunmore for a spell of winter . peter o'donnell publishes cobra trap , a final volume featuring modesty blaise . the first appeared in 1965 . margaret mitchell 's lost first novella , lost laysen , is published , 80 years after it was written . lady mary wortley montagu 's romance writings , including her novel princess docile , are first published 234 years after her death . . new books . fiction . anonymity ( joe klein ) – primary colors ( novel ) jeffrey archer – the fourth estate margaret atwood – alias grace beryl bainbridge – every man for himself david baldacci – absolute power iain m . banks – excession david bergen – a year of lesser thomas berger – suspects harold bloom – omens of millennium : the gnosis of angels , dreams , and resurrection dionne brand – in another place , not here brett butler – knee deep in paradise ann chamberlin – sofia ; the sultan 's daughter tom clancy – executive orders mary higgins clark – moonlight becomes you joseph connolly – this is it bernard cornwell – the bloody ground and enemy of god mike chapman & craig zobel – the homestar runner enters the strongest man in the world contest douglas coupland – polaroids from the dead amanda craig – a vicious circle robert crais – sunset express john darnton – neanderthal donald davidson – the big ballad jamboree fabrizio de andré – un destino ridicolo seamus deane – reading in the dark michel déon – the great and the good ( la cour des grands ) stephen r . donaldson – this day all gods die ben elton – popcorn steve erickson – amnesiascope helen fielding – bridget jones ' diary jon fosse – melancholy ii ( melancholia ii ) neil gaiman the sandman : the kindly ones ( graphic novel ; ninth in the sandman series ) the sandman : the wake ( graphic novel ; tenth in the sandman series ) mavis gallant – selected stories john gardner – cold richard garfinkle – celestial matters alex garland – the beach william golding – the double tongue john grisham – the runaway jury and hackers ( short stories ) james l . halperin – the truth machine colin harrison – manhattan nocturne elisabeth harvor – let me be the one ( short stories ) nancy huston – the goldberg variations tama janowitz – by the shores of gitchee gumee matt jones – bad therapy stephen king desperation the green mile the regulators dean r . koontz – intensity michael p . kube-mcdowell – before the storm shield of lies tyrant 's test caroline lamarche – le jour du chien ( the day of the dog ) hugh laurie – the gun seller john le carré – the tailor of panama paul leonard – speed of flight steve lyons – killing ground george r . r . martin – a game of thrones david a . mcintee – the shadow of weng-chiang terry mcmillan – how stella got her groove back javier marías – when i was mortal ( cuando fui mortal , short stories ) vladimir megre – anastasiya lawrence miles – christmas on a rational planet rohinton mistry – a fine balance shani mootoo – cereus blooms at night joyce carol oates – we were the mulvaneys daniel o'mahony – the man in the velvet mask kate orman – return of the living dad and sleepy chuck palahniuk – fight club lance parkin – cold fusion and just war marc platt – downtime terry pratchett – feet of clay and hogfather qiu miaojin ( posthumous ) – last words from montmartre james redfield – the tenth insight justin richards – the sands of time gareth roberts the english way of death the plotters mary rosenblum – synthesis & other virtual realities kristine kathryn rusch – the new rebellion gary russell – the scales of injustice al-tayyib salih – bandarshah jeff shaara – gods and generals michael slade – zombie and evil eye michael stackpole the krytos trap rogue squadron wedge 's gamble dave stone – death and diplomacy graham swift – last orders guy vanderhaeghe – the englishman 's boy david foster wallace – infinite jest monika maron – animal triste . children and young people . k.a . applegate - animorphs series marion zimmer bradley ( with rosemary edghill ) – witchlight james c . christensen ( with renwick st . james and alan dean foster ) – voyage of the basset anne fine – the tulip touch elaine forrestal – someone like me jeri freedman ( with j . f . rivkin ) – season of storms rumer godden the little chair premlata and the festival of lights cockcrow to starlight : a day full of poetry ( anthology ) mark helprin ( with chris van allsburg ) – a city in winter e . t . a . hoffmann ( with roberto innocenti ) – the nutcracker lyll becerra de jenkins - so loud a silence julius lester – sam and the tigers : a new telling of little black sambo anne mccaffrey – no one noticed the cat michael morpurgo – the butterfly lion jim murphy – a young patriot : the american revolution as experienced by one boy andre norton ( with martin h . greenberg ) – catfantastic iv joyce carol oates ( with barry moser ) – first love : a gothic tale iona opie – my very first mother goose philip pullman – the subtle knife ( second in his dark materials trilogy ) alan schroeder – minty : a story of young harriet tubman diane stanley – leonardo da vinci jean ure - skinny melon and me . drama . jeff baron – visiting mr . green nick enright – blackrock eve ensler – the vagina monologues pam gems – stanley jenny kemp – the black sequin dress ayub khan-din – east is east martin mcdonagh – the beauty queen of leenane mark ravenhill – shopping and fucking wallace shawn – the designated mourner joshua sobol – alma shelagh stephenson – the memory of water botho strauß – ithaka enda walsh – disco pigs peter whelan – the herbal bed roy williams – the no boys cricket club . poetry . . non-fiction . nelson algren ( posthumous ) – nonconformity ( essay , written 1953 ) stephen ambrose – undaunted courage andrea aromatico – alchimia : l'oro della conoscenza john berendt – midnight in the garden of good and evil anne berthelot – arthur et la table ronde : la force d'une légende david chalmers – the conscious mind : in search of a fundamental theory norman davies – europe : a history richard dawkins – climbing mount improbable antonia fraser – the gunpowder plot : terror and faith in 1605 daniel goleman – emotional intelligence denis guedj – numbers : the universal language jennifer hanson – the real freshman handbook samuel p . huntington – the clash of civilizations and the remaking of world order richard mabey – flora britannica howard marks – mr nice gabriel garcía márquez – news of a kidnapping ( noticia de un secuestro ) dylan morgan – the principles of hypnotherapy anne mullens – timely death faculty of arts , 1997 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , anne mullens . retrieved 2012-11-17 . denise schmandt-besserat – how writing came about arun shourie – missionaries in india alexander skutch – the minds of birds alessandro vezzosi – leonardo da vinci : the mind of the renaissance . deaths . january 5 – lincoln kirstein , american writer and impresario ( born 1907 ) january 8 – howard taubman , american author and critic ( born 1907 ) january 11 – harold walter bailey , english linguistics scholar ( born 1899 ) january 16 – kaye webb , english publisher and journalist ( born 1914 ) january 21 – efua sutherland , ghanaian dramatist , poet and children 's author ( born 1924 ) january 27 – barbara skelton , english fiction writer , memoirist and literary figure ( born 1916 ) january 28 jerry siegel , american cartoonist ( born 1914 ) joseph brodsky , russian-born poet and essayist , nobel prize laureate ( myocardial infarction , born 1940 ) february 11 bob shaw , northern irish science fiction writer ( born 1931 ) amelia rosselli , italian poet ( born 1930 ) february 18 – cathal ó sándair , irish-language novelist ( born 1922 ) march 3 – marguerite duras , french dramatist and film director ( born 1914 ) march 15 – wolfgang koeppen , german novelist ( born 1906 ) march 18 jacquetta hawkes ( née hopkins ) , english writer and archeologist ( born 1910 ) odysseas elytis , greek writer and nobel prize laureate ( born 1911 ) march 22 – ian stephens , canadian poet ( year of birth not known ) march 29 – frank daniel , czech-born screenwriter , director , and teacher ( born 1926 ) march 31 – dario bellezza , italian poet and dramatist ( hiv , born 1944 ) april 16 – leila mackinlay , british romantic novelist ( born 1910 ) april 18 – kalim siddiqui , pakistani-born english writer and islamic activist ( born 1931 ) april 20 – christopher robin milne , english writer and bookseller ( born 1920 ) april 22 – erma bombeck , american humorist and writer ( born 1927 ) april 23 – p . l . travers , australian-born children 's writer ( born 1899 ) may 8 – larry levis , american poet , author , and critic ( born 1946 ) may 24 – joseph mitchell , american journalist ( born 1908 ) may 26 ovidiu papadima , romanian critic and essayist ( born 1909 ) margaret douglas-home , english writer and musician ( born 1906 ) may 31 – timothy leary , american writer ( born 1920 ) june 2 – leon garfield , english children 's author ( born 1921 ) june 14 – gesualdo bufalino , italian novelist ( born 1920 ) june 15 – fitzroy maclean , scottish political writer , autobiographer and diplomat ( born 1911 ) july 10 – eno raud , estonian children 's author ( born 1928 ) july 22 – jessica mitford , anglo-american author , journalist and campaigner ( born 1917 ) september 29 – shusaku endo ( 遠藤周作 ) , japanese novelist ( born 1923 ) october 16 – eric malpass , english novelist ( born 1910 ) october 24 – sorley maclean , gaelic poet ( born 1911 ) december 9 – diana morgan , welsh playwright and screenwriter ( born 1908 ) december 12 – vance packard , american journalist and social critic ( born 1914 ) december 16 – quentin bell , english biographer and art historian ( born 1910 ) december 20 – carl sagan , american astronomer , astrophysicist and writer ( born 1934 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : wislawa szymborska camões prize : eduardo lourenço . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : bernard cohen , the blindman 's hat c . j . dennis prize for poetry : peter bakowski , in the human night kenneth slessor prize for poetry : eric beach , weeping for lost babylon mary gilmore prize : jordie albiston , nervous arcs miles franklin award : christopher koch , highways to a war . canada . bronwen wallace memorial award giller prize : margaret atwood : – alias grace see 1996 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : george g . blackburn , the guns of normandy faculty of arts , 1996 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , george g . blackburn , retrieved 11/27/2012 . france . prix goncourt : pascale roze , le chasseur zéro prix décembre : régis debray , loués soient nos seigneurs : une éducation politique prix médicis french : orlanda – jacqueline harpman and l'organisation – jean rolin prix médicis international : himmelfarb – michael kruger , germany and sonietchka – ludmila oulitskaïa , russia . united kingdom . booker prize : graham swift , last orders carnegie medal for children 's literature : melvin burgess , junk james tait black memorial prize for fiction : graham swift , last orders , and alice thompson , justine james tait black memorial prize for biography : diarmaid macculloch , thomas cranmer : a life cholmondeley award : elizabeth bartlett , dorothy nimmo , peter scupham , iain crichton smith eric gregory award : sue butler , cathy cullis , jane griffiths , jane holland , chris jones , sinéad morrissey , kate thomas orange prize for fiction : helen dunmore , a spell of winter queen 's gold medal for poetry : peter redgrove 1996 whitbread awards : seamus heaney , the spirit level . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : helen conkling , red peony night bernard f . connors prize for poetry : john voiklis , '' the princeling 's apology '' , and ( separately ) sarah arvio , '' visits from the seventh '' bobbitt national prize for poetry : kenneth koch , one train compton crook award : daniel graham jr . , the gatekeepers hugo award : neal stephenson , the diamond age national book award : andrea barrett , ship fever and other stories national book critics circle award : for fiction gina berriault , women in their beds national book critics circle award : for poetry william matthews , time and money national book critics circle award : for general nonfiction jonathan harr , a civil action national book critics circle award : for biography robert polito , savage art : a biography of jim thompson nebula award : nicola griffith , slow river newbery medal for children 's literature : karen cushman , the midwife 's apprentice pen/faulkner award for fiction : richard ford , independence day pulitzer prize for drama : jonathan larson , rent pulitzer prize for fiction : richard ford – independence day pulitzer prize for poetry : jorie graham : the dream of the unified field wallace stevens award : adrienne rich whiting awards : fiction : anderson ferrell , cristina garcía , molly gloss , brian kiteley , chris offutt ( fiction/nonfiction ) , judy troy , a.j . verdelle . nonfiction : patricia storace ( nonfiction/poetry ) . poetry : brigit pegeen kelly , elizabeth spires . elsewhere . international dublin literary award : david malouf , remembering babylon premio nadal : pedro maestre , matando dinosaurios con tirachinas . references .