Great Budworth

etymology . according to sir peter leycester , the name great budworth comes from the old saxon words bode ( '' dwelling '' ) and wurth ( '' a place by water '' ) . . geography . great budworth is approached from the main warrington to northwich road about from northwich , along a ridge overlooking two meres , budworth to the west and pickmere to the east . it was situated in the bucklow hundred and deanery of frodsham . at in length and in width , it was considered to be the second largest parish in cheshire , after prestbury . the parish contained nineteen townships : budworth , anderton , appleton-cum-hull , aston-juxta-budworth , barnton , barterton , or bartington , cogfoall , comberbach , dutton , little-leigh , marbury , marston , pickmere , stretton , nether-tabley , over-witley , nether witley , and wincham . . history . the early history of great budworth is documented in the domesday book , which mentions a priest at great budworth . open domesday online : ( great ) budworth , accessed february 2019 . in 1130 , st mary and all saints church was given to the augustinian canon of norton priory by william fitznigel , constable of chester and baron of halton . the lord of the manor during the reign of henry iii was geoffrey de dutton . he donated to norton priory a third of his land to endow masses for his soul . after the dissolution of the monasteries , king henry viii granted the estate to john grimsditch . it was afterwards divided into several parcels . there may have been a school in great budworth as early as 1563 , but certainly one existed by 1578 . for centuries , the village was owned by the head of arley hall who would collect rent from the villagers . rowland egerton-warburton of arley hall paid for restorations and improvements to the church in the 1850s . egerton-warburton also undertook a '' campaign to render it ( the village ) picturesque in victorian eyes '' . hubbard , p . 92 to this end he commissioned architects including william nesfield and john douglas to work on buildings in the village . hubbard , pp . 79–80 douglas remodelled the george and dragon inn in 1875 , hubbard , pp . 92–93 , 246 and restored some of the cottages . hubbard , pp . 240 , 242 , 278 a running pump was the only source of drinking water for the whole community until 1934 when a piped supply was first connected . until 1948 , great budworth was part of the arley hall estate . . notable landmarks . the grade i listed st mary and all saints church is in the village . the village is a popular location for films and television including cluedo and more recently a natwest advert . arley hall , a historic house , is nearby . also of note in the area are the george and dragon and cock o ' budworth public houses , 54–57 high street , dene cottages , goldmine house and belmont hall . st mary and all saints ' church . st mary and all saints ' church is recorded in the national heritage list for england as a designated grade & nbsp ; i listed building . it is an active anglican parish church in the diocese of chester , the archdeaconry of chester and the deanery of great budworth . clifton-taylor includes it in his list of best english parish churches . richards describes it as '' one of the finest examples of ecclesiastical architecture remaining in cheshire '' . the architectural historian nikolaus pevsner considered it to be '' one of the most satisfactory perpendicular churches in cheshire '' . in the north chapel is a memorial to sir & nbsp ; peter leicester , the 17th-century historian , and in the warburton chapel is the alabaster effigy of sir & nbsp ; john warburton who died in 1575 . in the north chapel is an organ designed by samuel renn , installed in 1839 . houses . goldmine house and its attached cottage ( rose cottage ) , designated as a grade & nbsp ; ii listed building , were built in 1870 for rowland egerton-warburton of arley hall and were designed by the chester architect john douglas . hubbard , p.278 built with brown brick with some timber framing , and clay tile roofs the house faces west . it is a double storied building with two gabled bays . the cottage is simple in form with a dormer and blue brick diapering . dene cottages , a grade & nbsp ; ii listed pair of cottages , were built in 1867–68 , again for rowland egerton-warburton and by douglas . hubbard , p.240 the lower storeys are constructed in brown brick . the upper storeys are timber-framed with plaster panels . the roof is in clay tiles . the plaster panels are pargeting with floral motifs . belmont hall in this parish was built by j . h . smith-barry esq . , who deposited in it his valuable collection of pictures and statues , afterwards removed to marbury . smith-barry sold it to henry clarke . built in 1755 and designed by james gibbs , it is a grade & nbsp ; i listed building . as of 2020 it is occupied by cransley school . . george and dragon pub . the george and dragon pub , another grade & nbsp ; ii listed building , was initially built as a simple three-bay georgian inn . in 1875 , john douglas was commissioned to restore it by egerton-warburton . he added tall rubbed chimneys , mullioned windows and a steep pyramidal turret . hubbard , pp . 92–93 the double-storied inn has bays built in brick with a roughcast stucco on the upper storey . it has clay tiled covered hipped roofs . its other architectural features comprise a projecting two-storey porch with oak post-and-rail fence inscribed with a number of sayings on either side , lateral bay with four-light mullioned window in the lower storey and a three-light mullioned window in the upper storey , a tall rubbed brick chimneystack , and the inn sign located diagonally from the right corner . the inn continues to function as a public house and restaurant . . 54–57 high street . 54–57 high street is a row of four grade & nbsp ; ii listed dwellings in the high street , built in the early 18th century . they were refaced and partly rebuilt for rowland egerton-warburton of arley hall by john douglas in 1870 or 1875 . hubbard , p . 242 the two outer buildings are houses and the two central buildings are cottages . they are built in brown brick with clay tile roofs , and have two storeys plus attics . each building has a gable , those on the outer buildings larger than those on the inner , all decorated with brick and plaster . . flora and fauna . in the middle ages , budworth mere was used as a fish hatchery . stocked with bream and pike , its reeds shelter breeding reed warblers and great crested grebes . other avifauna includes mallards and coots . . culture . the soul cakers play is a seasonal folk play performed in the village every november which brings together the whole community . it features saint george , the black knight and a hobby horse . in great budworth , the '' soul cake '' may be a glass of beer or other sustenance ; into it comes the devil , or beelzebub , now '' belshy bob '' . the high street and the church feature in the 2019 bbc adaption of h.g . wells the war of the worlds . see also . listed buildings in great budworth . references . citations bibliography . external links .