Geoid

description . file : geoida.svg thumb 1 . ocean 2 . reference ellipsoid 3 . local plumb line 4 . continent 5 . geoid the geoid surface is irregular , unlike the reference ellipsoid ( which is a mathematical idealized representation of the physical earth ) , but is considerably smoother than earth 's physical surface . although the physical earth has excursions of +8,848 m ( mount everest ) and −11,034 m ( marianas trench ) , the geoid 's deviation from an ellipsoid ranges from +85 & nbsp ; m ( iceland ) to −106 & nbsp ; m ( southern india ) , less than 200 m total . if the ocean were isopycnic ( of constant density ) and undisturbed by tides , currents or weather , its surface would resemble the geoid . the permanent deviation between the geoid and mean sea level is called ocean surface topography . if the continental land masses were crisscrossed by a series of tunnels or canals , the sea level in those canals would also very nearly coincide with the geoid . in reality , the geoid does not have a physical meaning under the continents , but geodesists are able to derive the heights of continental points above this imaginary , yet physically defined , surface by spirit leveling . being an equipotential surface , the geoid is , by definition , a surface to which the force of gravity is everywhere perpendicular . that means that when traveling by ship , one does not notice the undulation of the geoid ; the local vertical ( plumb line ) is always perpendicular to the geoid and the local horizon tangential to it . likewise , spirit levels will always be parallel to the geoid . on a long voyage , spirit leveling indicates height variations even though the ship is always at sea level ( neglecting the effects of tides ) . that is because gps satellites , orbiting about the center of gravity of the earth , can measure heights only relative to a geocentric reference ellipsoid . to obtain one 's geoidal height , a raw gps reading must be corrected . conversely , height determined by spirit leveling from a tidal measurement station , as in traditional land surveying , is always geoidal height . modern gps receivers have a grid implemented in the source of the geoid ( e.g . egm-96 , egm-2008 , egm-2020 ) height over the world geodetic system ( wgs , e.g . wgs84 ) ellipsoid from the current position . then , they are able to correct the height above wgs ellipsoid to the height above egm96 geoid . when height is not zero on a ship , the discrepancy is caused by other factors such as ocean tides , atmospheric pressure ( meteorological effects ) , local sea surface topography and measurement uncertainties . simplified example . the gravitational field of the earth is not uniform . an oblate spheroid is typically used as the idealized earth , but even if the earth were spherical and did not rotate , the strength of gravity would not be the same everywhere because density varies throughout the planet . this is due to magma distributions , mountain ranges , deep sea trenches , crust compaction due to glaciers , and so on . if that sphere were then covered in water , the water would not be the same height everywhere . instead , the water level would be higher or lower with respect to earth 's center , depending on the strength of gravity in that location . the geoid level coincides with where the water would be . the geoid rises where the earth material is locally more dense , which is where the earth exerts greater gravitational pull . this would not mean that water flows upward in these locations , despite sea level 's greater distance from earth 's center : '' upward '' is defined by the direction away from gravity 's pull , not by distance from earth 's center . undulation . undulation of the geoid is the height of the geoid relative to a given ellipsoid of reference . the undulation is not standardized , as different countries use different mean sea levels as reference , but most commonly refers to the egm96 geoid . relationship to gps/gnss . in maps and common use the height over the mean sea level ( such as orthometric height ) is used to indicate the height of elevations while the ellipsoidal height results from the gps system and similar gnss . the deviation n between the ellipsoidal height h and the orthometric height h can be calculated by : n h-h likewise , the deviation \zeta between the ellipsoidal height h and the normal height h_n can be calculated by : \zeta h-h_n . spherical harmonics representation . spherical harmonics are often used to approximate the shape of the geoid . the current best such set of spherical harmonic coefficients is egm2020 ( earth gravity model 2020 ) , determined in an international collaborative project led by the national imagery and mapping agency ( now the national geospatial-intelligence agency , or nga ) . the mathematical description of the non-rotating part of the potential function in this model is : : v \frac 360 . for many applications the complete series is unnecessarily complex and is truncated after a few ( perhaps several dozen ) terms . new even higher resolution models are currently under development . for example , many of the authors of egm96 are working on an updated model that should incorporate much of the new satellite gravity data ( e.g . , the gravity recovery and climate experiment ) , and should support up to degree and order 2160 ( 1/6 of a degree , requiring over 4 million coefficients ) . pavlis , n.k . , s.a . holmes . s . kenyon , d . schmit , r . trimmer , '' gravitational potential expansion to degree 2160 '' , iag international symposium , gravity , geoid and space mission ggsm2004 , porto , portugal , 2004 . the egm2008 has been released in 2008 as an improvement of the egm96 one . it contains a complete to spherical harmonic degree and order 2159 , and contains additional coefficients extending to degree 2190 and order 2159 . software and data is on the earth gravitational model 2008 ( egm2008 ) - wgs 84 version ] page . the egm2020 has been released in 2020 , further improving the egm2008 but with the same number of harmonics . . determination . calculating the undulation is mathematically challenging . this is why many handheld gps receivers have built-in undulation lookup tables to determine the height above sea level . the precise geoid solution by vaníček and co-workers improved on the stokesian approach to geoid computation . their solution enables millimetre-to-centimetre accuracy in geoid computation , an order of magnitude improvement from previous classical solutions . geoid undulations display uncertainties which can be estimated by using several methods , e.g . least squares collocation ( lsc ) , fuzzy logic , artificial neural network , radial basis function ( rbf ) , and geostatistics techniques . geostatistical approach has been defined as the most improved technique in prediction of geoid undulation . . anomalies . variations in the height of the geoidal surface are related to density anomalous distributions within the earth . geoid measures thus help understanding the internal structure of the planet . synthetic calculations show that the geoidal signature of a thickened crust ( for example , in orogen produced by continental collision ) is positive , opposite to what should be expected if the thickening affects the entire lithosphere . mantle convection also changes the shape of the geoid over time . richards , m . a . , and b . h . hager , 1984 . geoid anomalies in a dynamic mantle , j . geophys . res . , 89 , 5987–6002 , doi:10.1029/jb089ib07p05987 . . time-variability . recent satellite missions , such as the gravity field and steady-state ocean circulation explorer ( goce ) and grace , have enabled the study of time-variable geoid signals . the first products based on goce satellite data became available online in june 2010 , through the european space agency ( esa ) ’ s earth observation user services tools . esa launched the satellite in march 2009 on a mission to map earth 's gravity with unprecedented accuracy and spatial resolution . on 31 march 2011 , the new geoid model was unveiled at the fourth international goce user workshop hosted at the technische universität münchen in munich , germany . studies using the time-variable geoid computed from grace data have provided information on global hydrologic cycles , mass balances of ice sheets , and postglacial rebound . from postglacial rebound measurements , time-variable grace data can be used to deduce the viscosity of earth 's mantle . . other celestial bodies . the concept of the geoid has been extended to other planets and also moons , as well as asteroids . the areoid ( the geoid of mars ) has been measured using flight paths of satellite missions such as mariner 9 and viking . the main departures from the ellipsoid expected of an ideal fluid are from the tharsis volcanic plateau , a continent-size region of elevated terrain , and its antipodes . . see also . geodetic datum geopotential physical geodesy international terrestrial reference frame . references . further reading . . external links . main nga ( was nima ) page on earth gravity models international geoid service ( iges ) egm96 nasa gsfc earth gravity model earth gravitational model 2008 ( egm2008 , released in july 2008 ) noaa geoid webpage international centre for global earth models ( icgem ) kiamehr 's geoid home page geoid tutorial from li and gotze ( 964kb pdf file ) geoid tutorial at grace website precise geoid determination based on the least-squares modification of stokes ’ formula ( phd thesis pdf )