William Gaddis

life and career . gaddis was born in new york city to william thomas gaddis , who worked '' on wall street and in politics '' , and edith ( charles ) gaddis , who worked her way up from being secretary to the president of the new york steam corporation to an executive position as its chief purchasing agent . when he was three , his parents separated and gaddis was subsequently raised by his mother in massapequa , long island . at age 5 he was sent to merricourt boarding school in berlin , connecticut . he continued in private school until the eighth grade , after which he returned to long island to receive his diploma at farmingdale high school in 1941 . he entered harvard in 1941 where he was a member of the harvard lampoon ( where he eventually served as president ) , but was asked to leave in 1944 due to an altercation with police . he worked as a fact checker for the new yorker for little over a year ( late february 1945 until late april 1946 ) , then spent five years traveling in mexico , central america , spain , france , england , and north africa , returning to the united states in 1951 . his first novel , the recognitions , appeared in 1955 . a lengthy , complex , and allusive work , it had to wait to find its audience . newspaper reviewers considered it overly intellectual , overwritten , and disgusting . ( the book was defended by jack green in a series of broadsheets blasting the critics ; the series was collected later under the title fire the bastards ! ) '' fire the bastards ! : the great defender of william gaddis '' . mark o'connell . the new yorker , february 20 , 2012 . gaddis then turned to public relations work and the making of documentary films to support himself and his family . in this role he worked for pfizer , eastman kodak , ibm , and the united states army , among others . he also received a national institute of arts and letters grant , a rockefeller grant , and two national endowment for the arts grants , all of which helped him write his second novel . in 1975 he published j r , told almost entirely in unattributed dialogue . its eponymous protagonist , an 11-year-old , learns enough about the stock market from a class field trip to build a financial empire of his own . critical opinion had caught up with him , and the book won the national book award for fiction . '' national book awards & nbsp ; – 1976 '' . national book foundation . retrieved march 28 , 2012 . ( with essay by chad post from the awards 60-year anniversary blog . ) carpenter 's gothic ( 1985 ) offered a shorter and more accessible picture of gaddis 's sardonic worldview . instead of struggling against misanthropy ( as in the recognitions ) or reluctantly giving ground to it ( as in j r ) , carpenter 's gothic wallows in it . the continual litigation that was a theme in that book becomes the central theme and plot device in a frolic of his own ( 1994 ) —which earned him his second national book award '' national book awards & nbsp ; – 1994 '' . national book foundation . retrieved march 28 , 2012 . ( with essay by harold augenbraum from the awards 60-year anniversary blog . ) and was a finalist for the national book critics circle award fiction . gaddis died at home in east hampton , new york , of prostate cancer on december 16 , 1998 , but not before creating his final work , agapē agape ( the first word of the title is the greek agapē , meaning divine , unconditional love ) , which was published in 2002 , a novella in the form of the last words of a character similar but not identical to his creator . the rush for second place , published at the same time , collected most of gaddis 's previously published nonfiction . family life . in may 1955 gaddis eloped with patsy thompson black ( 1928–2000 ) , a model and actress who had come to new york from north carolina to break into theater . the source for all details in this section is the letters of william gaddis , ed . steven moore ( dalkey archive press , 2013 ) . they had two children : sarah ( b . september 1955 ) —who wrote a novel , swallow hard ( 1991 ) , inspired by her relationship with her father—and matthew ( b . january 1958 ) . their marriage ended in divorce in 1965 . in 1968 gaddis married judith thompson ( b . 1940 ) , a journalist and later an antiques dealer . they separated in 1978 , and the following year he reunited with muriel murphy oxenberg ( 1926–2008 ) , whom he had first met in 1953 . they lived together until around the time when a frolic of his own was published ( 1994 ) , which is dedicated to her . gaddis lived alone for the remainder of his life . legacy and influence . among fans of post-modern fiction , gaddis is often acknowledged as being one of the greatest of american post-war novelists . a critic who early on appreciated his work and recognized its value is steven moore : in 1982 he published a reader 's guide to william gaddis 's '' the recognitions '' and in 1989 a monograph on gaddis in the twayne series . gaddis 's influence is vast ( although frequently subterranean ) : for example , postmodern authors such as don delillo and thomas pynchon seem to have been influenced by gaddis ( indeed , upon publication of v . , pynchon was actually speculated to have been a pen name for gaddis due to the similarity of styles and the dearth of information about the two authors ; the wanda tinasky letters also claimed that gaddis , pynchon , and jack green were the same person ) , as well as authors such as joseph mcelroy , william gass , david markson , and david foster wallace , who have all stated their admiration for gaddis in general and the recognitions in particular . jonathan franzen , who in an essay in the new yorker called gaddis '' an old literary hero of mine '' , dubbed him 'mr . difficult ' , stating that '' by a comfortable margin , the most difficult book i ever voluntarily read in its entirety was gaddis ' nine-hundred-and-fifty-six-page first novel , the recognitions . '' '' mr . difficult : william gaddis and the problem of hard-to-read books '' . jonathan franzen . the new yorker , september 30 , 2002 . transcribed by adilegian.com franzen continued : '' in the four decades following the publication of the recognitions , gaddis 's work grew angrier and angrier . it 's a signature paradox of literary postmodernism : the writer whose least angry work was written first . '' characters in fiction based on gaddis include '' harry lees '' in chandler brossard 's 1952 novel who walk in darkness , '' harold sand '' in jack kerouac 's autobiographical 1958 novella the subterraneans and possibly '' bill gray '' in don delillo 's 1991 novel mao ii . ( delillo was a friend of gaddis . ) the characters '' richard whitehurst '' in kurt wenzel 's lit life : a novel ( 2001 ) and '' joshua gel '' in stephen dixon 's i : a novel ( 2002 ) likely are based on gaddis . authors clearly influenced by gaddis include jonathan franzen ( the corrections ) , david markson ( epitaph for a tramp ) , joseph mcelroy ( a smuggler 's bible ) and stanley elkin ( the magic kingdom ) . his life and work are the subject of a comprehensive website , the gaddis annotations , which has been noted in at least one academic journal as a superior example of scholarship using new media resources . gaddis 's papers are collected at washington university in st . louis . the first book-length biography , joseph tabbi 's nobody grew but the business : on the life and work of william gaddis , was published by northwestern university press in may 2015 . his works have been translated into a number of foreign languages , including french , german , spanish , italian , polish , portuguese , swedish , chinese , turkish , and ukrainian . . awards and honors . beside the awards for particular works , gaddis has received three other awards and honors : the macarthur foundation ’ s '' genius award '' ( 1982 ) ; election to the american academy and institute of arts and letters ( 1989 ) ; the lannan literary award for lifetime achievement ( 1993 ) . works . fiction the recognitions ( 1955 ) j r ( 1975 ) carpenter 's gothic ( 1985 ) a frolic of his own ( 1994 ) agapē agape ( completed 1998 , published 2002 ) non-fiction the rush for second place ( collection , published 2002 ) . see also . list of novelists from the united states . references . external links . the gaddis annotations , a comprehensive scholarly site the william gaddis papers at washington university in st . louis the william gaddis pages at the modern word william gaddis at library of congress authorities , with 15 catalog records . further reading . alberts , crystal , christopher leise , and birger vanwesenbeeck , eds . william gaddis , '' the last of something . ” jefferson , nc : mcfarland , 2009 . bloom , harold , ed . william gaddis . bloom ’ s modern critical views . philadelphia : chelsea house , 2004 . brunel , jean-louis , and michel gresset , eds . william gaddis . profils americaines 6 ( autumn 1994 ) . comnes , gregory . the ethics of indeterminacy in the novels of william gaddis . gainesville : university press of florida , 1994 . félix , brigitte , ed . reading william gaddis : a collective volume of essays on william gaddis 's novels , from “ j r ” to “ agapē agape . ” orléans : presses universitaires d'orléans , 2007 . green , jack . fire the bastards ! 1962 . rpt . with an introduction by steven moore . normal , il : dalkey archive press , 1992 . johnston , john . carnival of repetition : gaddis ’ s “ the recognitions ” and postmodern theory . philadelphia : university of pennsylvania press , 1990 . knight , christopher j . hints and guesses : william gaddis ’ s fiction of longing . madison : university of wisconsin press , 1997 . kuehl , john , and steven moore , eds . in recognition of william gaddis . syracuse : syracuse university press , 1984 . moody , rick , ed . “ william gaddis : a portfolio , ” conjunctions 41 ( 2003 ) : 373–415 . moore , steven . a reader ’ s guide to william gaddis ’ s “ the recognitions . ” lincoln : university of nebraska press , 1982 . expanded edition on the gaddis annotations . ——— . william gaddis . new york : bloomsbury , 2015 . o ’ brien , john , ed . william gaddis / nicholas mosley number . review of contemporary fiction 2.2 . ( summer 1982 ) : 4–56 . tabbi , joseph . nobody grew but the business : the life and work of william gaddis . evanston : northwestern university press , 2015 . ——— , and rone shavers , eds . paper empire : william gaddis and the world system . tuscaloosa : university of alabama press , 2007 . wolfe , peter . a vision of his own : the mind and art of william gaddis . madison , nj : fairleigh dickinson univ . press , 1997 .