Large Binocular Telescope

project . the lbt was originally named the '' columbus project '' . it is a joint project of these members : the italian astronomical community represented by the istituto nazionale di astrofisica , the university of arizona , university of minnesota , university of notre dame , university of virginia , the lbt beteiligungsgesellschaft in germany ( max planck institute for astronomy in heidelberg , landessternwarte in heidelberg , leibniz institute for astrophysics potsdam ( aip ) , max planck institute for extraterrestrial physics in munich and max planck institute for radio astronomy in bonn ) ; the ohio state university ; and the research corporation for science advancement based in tucson , az . the cost was around 100 million euro . the telescope design has two 8.4 & nbsp ; m ( 330 & nbsp ; inch ) mirrors mounted on a common base , hence the name '' binocular '' . lbt takes advantage of active and adaptive optics , provided by arcetri observatory . the collecting area is two 8.4 meter aperture mirrors , which works out to about 111 & nbsp ; m 2 combined . this area is equivalent to an circular aperture , which would be greater than any other single telescope , but it is not comparable in many respects since the light is collected at a lower diffraction limit and is not combined in the same way . also , an interferometry mode will be available , with a maximum baseline of for aperture synthesis imaging observations and a baseline of for nulling interferometry . this feature is along one axis with the lbti instrument at wavelengths of 2.9–13 micrometres , which is the near infrared . the telescope was designed by a group of italian firms , and assembled by ansaldo in its milanese plant . mountain controversy . the choice of location sparked considerable local controversy , both from the san carlos apache tribe , who view the mountain as sacred , and from environmentalists who contended that the observatory would cause the demise of an endangered subspecies of the american red squirrel , the mount graham red squirrel . environmentalists and members of the tribe filed some forty lawsuits & nbsp ; – eight of which ended up before a federal appeals court & nbsp ; – but the project ultimately prevailed after an act of the united states congress . the telescope and mountain observatory survived two major forest fires in thirteen years , the more recent in the summer of 2017 . likewise the squirrels continue to survive . some experts now believe their numbers fluctuate dependent upon nut harvest without regard to the observatory . . first light . the telescope was dedicated in october 2004 and saw first light with a single primary mirror on october 12 , 2005 which viewed ngc 891 . the second primary mirror was installed in january 2006 and became fully operational in january 2008 . the first light with the second primary mirror was on september 18 , 2006 , and for the first and second together it was on january 11–12 , 2008 . the first binocular light images show three false-color renditions of the spiral galaxy ngc 2770 . the galaxy is 88 million light years from our milky way , a relatively close neighbor . the galaxy has a flat disk of stars and glowing gas tipped slightly toward our line of sight . the first image taken combined ultraviolet and green light , and emphasizes the clumpy regions of newly formed hot stars in the spiral arms . the second image combined two deep red colors to highlight the smoother distribution of older , cooler stars . the third image was a composite of ultraviolet , green and deep red light and shows the detailed structure of hot , moderate and cool stars in the galaxy . the cameras and images were produced by the large binocular camera team , led by emanuele giallongo at the rome astrophysical observatory . in binocular aperture synthesis mode lbt has a light-collecting area of 111 m 2 , equivalent to a single primary mirror in diameter , and will combine light to produce the image sharpness equivalent to a single telescope . however , this requires a beam combiner that was tested in 2008 , but has not been a part of regular operations . it can take images with one side at 8.4 m aperture , or take two images of the same object using different instruments on each side of the telescope . adaptive optics . in the summer of 2010 , the '' first light adaptive optics '' ( flao ) – an adaptive optics system with a deformable secondary mirror rather than correcting atmospheric distortion further downstream in the optics – was inaugurated . using one 8.4 m side , it surpassed hubble sharpness ( at certain light wavelengths ) , achieving a strehl ratio of 60–80 % rather than the 20–30 % of older adaptive optic systems , or the 1 % typically achieved without adaptive optics for telescopes of this size . adaptive optics at a telescope 's secondary ( m2 ) was previously tested at mmt observatory by the arcetri observatory and university of arizona team . . in the media . the telescope has also made appearances on an episode of the discovery channel tv show really big things , national geographic channel big , bigger , biggest , and the bbc program the sky at night . the bbc radio 4 radio documentary the new galileos covered the lbt and the jwst . . discoveries and observations . lbt , with the xmm-newton , was used to discover the galaxy cluster 2xmm j083026+524133 in 2008 , over 7 billion light years away from earth . in 2007 the lbt detected a 26th magnitude afterglow from the gamma ray burst grb 070125 . in 2017 , lbt observed the osiris-rex spacecraft , an unmanned asteroid sample return spacecraft , in space while it was en route . . instruments . some current or planned lbt telescope instruments : lbc – optical and near ultraviolet wide field prime focus cameras . one is optimized for the blue part of the optical spectrum and one for the red . ( both cameras operational ) pepsi – a high resolution and very high-resolution optical spectrograph and imaging polarimeter at the combined focus . ( in development ) mods – two optical multi object and longslit spectrographs plus imagers . capable of running in a single mirror or binocular mode . ( mods1 operational – mods2 in integration on the mountain ) luci – two multi-object and longslit infrared spectrographs plus imagers , one for each side ( associated with one of the 8m mirrors ) of the telescope . the imager has 2 cameras and can observe in both seeing-limited and diffraction-limited ( with adaptive optics ) modes . end of commissioning and hand over to the lbto was in 2018 . linc/nirvana – wide-field interferometric imaging with adaptive optics at the combined focus ( in commissioning ) . lbti/lmircam – 2.9 to 5.2 micron fizeau imaging and medium resolution grism spectroscopy at the combined focus . lbti/nomic – n band nulling imager for the study of protoplanetary and debris disks at the combined focus . ( in commissioning phase – first stabilization of the fringes in dec 2013 ) flao – first light adaptive optics to correct atmospheric distortion argos – multiple laser guide star unit capable of supporting ground layer or multi conjugate adaptive optics . end of commissioning and handover to lbto was in 2018 . . luci . luci ( originally lucifer : large binocular telescope near-infrared spectroscopic utility with camera and integral field unit for extragalactic research ) is the near-infrared instrument for the lbt . the name of the instrument was changed to luci in 2012 . luci operates in the 0.9–2.5 & nbsp ; µm spectral range using a 2048 x 2048 element hawaii-2rg detector array from teledyne and provides imaging and spectroscopic capabilities in seeing- and diffraction-limited modes . in its focal plane area , long-slit and multi-slit masks can be installed for single-object and multi-object spectroscopy . a fixed collimator produces an image of the entrance aperture in which either a mirror ( for imaging ) or a grating can be positioned . three camera optics with numerical apertures of 1.8 , 3.75 and 30 provide image scales of 0.25 , 0.12 , and 0.015 arcsec/detector element for wide field , seeing-limited and diffraction-limited observations . luci is operated at cryogenic temperatures , and is therefore enclosed in a cryostat of 1.6 m diameter and 1.6 m height , and cooled down to about −200 °c by two closed-cycle coolers . . lbto collaboration . partners in the lbt project arizona ( 25 % ) – az university of arizona ( headquarters ) – tucson arizona state university – tempe northern arizona university – flagstaff germany ( 25 % ) – lbtb landessternwarte – heidelberg leibniz-institut für astrophysik potsdam – potsdam max planck institute for astronomy – heidelberg max planck institute for extraterrestrial physics – munich max-planck-institut für radioastronomie – bonn italy ( 25 % ) – inaf inaf research corporation for science advancement ( 12.5 % ) – rc the ohio state university university of notre dame university of minnesota university of virginia the ohio state university ( 12.5 % ) – osu . other mgio facilities . mount graham submillimeter telescope vatican advanced technology telescope