Stardust (Gaiman novel)

main characters . tristran thorn : the book 's main character ( renamed '' tristan '' in the movie adaptation ) , a half-faerie , half-human boy raised by his father dunstan thorn and stepmother daisy , whom he believes to be his mother . tristran foolishly promises to retrieve a fallen star for the girl he wants to be his sweetheart , victoria ( see below ) , and so unexpectedly finds the beautiful yvaine . yvaine : a fallen star , which tristran vows to find and bring to victoria forester . in faerie , stars are living creatures . yvaine appears to be immortal , but not invulnerable . she is pursued by the lilim and the surviving sons of the lord of stormhold , who want her for their own reasons . when tristran realises his love for her , he abandons his courtship of victoria forester , and yvaine marries him despite their inability to have children . dunstan thorn : tristran 's father . main character in the beginning of the book . he visited the wall market to find a gift for his sweetheart daisy hempstock , and ended up fathering tristran by madame semele 's abused slave faerie girl , lady una . prior to this , he had bought a crystal snowdrop from this girl , and later gives the flower to tristran . he is married to daisy , who is the mother of tristran 's half-sister louisa . victoria forester : a resident of wall described as '' the most beautiful girl for a hundred miles around '' . she is the daughter of bridget comfrey and tommy forester . although tristran is infatuated with her , she does not return his feelings and does not take his promise to bring her the fallen star seriously at first . she ultimately marries a man called monday and thereby unwittingly frees tristran 's mother , lady una , from slavery . the lord of stormhold : the eighty-first lord of stormhold is an old man who rules stormhold until his death . at the beginning of stardust , he has four dead sons ( secundus , quartus , quintus , and sextus ) and three living ones ( primus , tertius , and septimus ) , in addition to his long-lost daughter una . the dead sons appear as ghostly observers , while the living sons constantly plot to kill each other to succeed their father as lord of stormhold . lord septimus : the youngest and most ruthless of the lords of stormhold . he is , by nature , a skilled assassin and has succeeded in murdering the majority of his family . lord primus : the oldest of the lords of stormhold . in comparison with his brothers , he is benevolent , compassionate and reasonable . una : a cat-eared faerie girl of great beauty who works as a slave for madame semele until released by an improbable occurrence that fulfills the conditions of her debt . una suffers constant abuse at the hands of madame semele , being beaten and called a '' slattern '' . when not toiling for the witch-woman , she is kept in the form of a multicoloured bird chained by a silver thread to a gypsy wagon . she is later revealed to be the lady una , only daughter of the lord of stormhold , and tristran 's birth mother . madame semele/ditchwater sal : a witch , and a member of the sisterhood to which the lilim belong . the witch-queen knew semele as ditchwater sal when she was '' a young chit of a thing '' . on their first encounter , semele drugs the witch-queen 's food with a magical substance that causes her to speak only the truth , thus forcing her to blurt out the truth of the fallen star . semele plots to find the star first and restore her own youth , but the witch-queen curses her so that she will never perceive the star in any way . the lilim : three old women of great power . the eldest of the three is called '' the witch-queen '' , though they are also called by this title collectively . they are never named , as they lost their names long ago , but the eldest adopts the alias '' morwanneg '' at one point . the lilim were once the beautiful queens of a magical kingdom of witches ; when it was lost beneath the sea , centuries of age caught up with them . they seek the fallen star because , by consuming her heart , they will be granted centuries of youth and beauty . using magic counteracts the effect ; therefore with each spell cast by the witch-queen , she grows older and uglier . in the movie adaptation , they are named lamia , mormo , and empusa , but none of their backstory is included . plot . on the outskirts of wall , a small town in rural england , the faerie market is held every nine years on the other side of the wall dividing faerie — a mystical realm of magic — from our world and for which the town of wall is named . as the book begins , the market has just begun and the town is filled with visitors and vendors . a young man named dunstan thorn rents out his cottage to a stranger in exchange for his '' heart 's desire , '' in addition to a monetary payment . the next day in the market , he meets una , a beautiful woman imprisoned by the witch called semele . he purchases a glass snowdrop from una with a kiss , and gives the flower to his fiancée daisy . enthralled by her beauty during the encounter , dunstan later meets una in the woods that night and makes love to her . a month later , dunstan marries daisy as planned . in february ( a little over nine months later ) , he receives a baby in a basket — his and una 's son , tristran . eighteen years after these events , tristran — now a young man with a half-sister named louisa — seeks the love of victoria forester , the town beauty . one night , while tristran is walking her home from the shop where he works , he sees a shooting star land in faerie , and rash promise . thinking that he will never actually do it , victoria promises to do whatever he asks if he brings her the star . tristran tells his father of the bargain , and dunstan gives tristran the snowdrop , as well as helping him pass the guards at the wall by alluding to his faerie heritage . tristran enters faerie and begins his search for the star . at stormhold , in faerie , the king of stormhold gathers his sons to determine who will be his heir ; he hurls the power of stormhold , a topaz that marks its bearer as the ruler of the land , into the sky , knocking that selfsame star from the sky . he then dies , and his sons leave together . septimus departs on his own after poisoning tertius at a nearby inn . neither of the remaining brothers is aware that their other slain brothers , each one killed for the crown , are with them in ghost form . in a small , grey house in the woods , three ancient and mighty witches known as the lillim learn of the fallen star by reading the entrails of a dead goat , and the eldest of the lilim consumes their last reserves of '' years '' , later revealed to be the heart of another fallen star , to become young again . she meets a farm boy , brevis , at a crossroads , takes his goat , and transforms him into a second goat , using the two animals to pull her small chariot . tristran meets a small hairy man who helps him through the woods . after tristran helps them escape deadly trees called serewood , he learns he has the ability to find any location in faerie . tristran is taunted by tiny faeries , who say that he is '' soon to face his true love 's scorn . '' the hairy man gives tristran a new outfit , a silver chain like the one used to imprison una , and a candle-stub which allows one to travel great distances quickly while it burns , which he explains by referencing the nursery rhyme '' how many miles to babylon ? '' . tristran uses the candle to quickly reach the fallen star , but is surprised to find that the star is actually a young woman named yvaine , whose leg was broken in the fall . yvaine hurls mud at him and continuously insults him . he resolves to take her to victoria anyway , tying her to him with the chain . however , the candle goes out before he can return , so the two sleep for the night . the next morning , tristran tells yvaine about his promise to victoria and his intention to bring yvaine to her . tristran makes yvaine a simple crutch to help her walk as her broken leg hinders her movement . they arrive at a clearing where they witness a fight between a lion and a unicorn over a golden crown . yvaine asks tristran to help the unicorn when the lion was about to kill it . tristran , remembering the old nursery rhyme , the lion and the unicorn , picks up the crown and gives it to the lion . with the crown upon its head , the lion slips away into the forest . tristran and yvaine spend the night at the clearing beside the wounded unicorn . yvaine escapes on the unicorn when tristran leaves in search of food . the witch-queen , on her search for the star , encounters madam semele . they share a meal and madam semele gives the witch-queen meat cooked with limbus grass , which causes anyone who tastes it to speak nothing but the truth , forcing her to reveal the purpose of her journey . the enraged witch-queen puts a curse on her , which prevents her from seeing , touching or perceiving the star in any way and causing semele to forget their meeting the moment the witch-queen leaves . on discovering that yvaine is gone , a despondent and regretful tristran spends the night under a tree . tristran talks to a tree who says that pan , the spirit of the forest , told her to help him . the tree tells tristran that there are people looking for yvaine and that there is a path in the forest with a carriage coming down it that tristran ca n't miss . then it gives tristran a leaf and says to listen to it when he needs help the most . tristran runs to catch the carriage and nearly misses it but for a tree that has fallen in the carriage 's path . tristran meets primus , the driver of the carriage , and persuades him to allow tristran to ride in the carriage . in the mountains the witch-queen transforms her chariot into an inn to catch yvaine , who is coming her way . she turns the goat into a man , and the goat who used to be brevis into a girl . yvaine falls for the trap , and the witch-queen is preparing to carve out her heart when tristran and primus , who have also been attracted by the inn , arrive . the witch-queen decides to delay killing yvaine until she has dealt with the two unwanted guests . she attempts to poison tristran while he is tending to the horses , but the unicorn , which is also lodged in the stable , warns him just in time . he rushes back to the inn , but is too late to warn primus . however he is able to rescue yvaine by forming a makeshift candle from the remnants of the magical candle he had obtained earlier , burning his left hand in the process . shortly afterwards , septimus arrives and finds primus ' body . he sets off in search of the witch-queen , to fulfill an obligation to avenge his slain brother , and the topaz , to claim his birthright as the last surviving son of stormhold . tristran and yvaine escape the witch-queen , but find themselves in an almost equally perilous situation . they walk past many scenes in the light of the candle , but eventually end up stranded on a cloud , miles above faerie . they are rescued by the crew of a passing airborne ship . the captain of the ship agrees to help them on their way back to wall , hinting that he is part of a mysterious 'fellowship ' that wants to help tristran for some unspecified reason . tristran expresses regret for chaining yvaine up . the star reveals that while tristran no longer intends to force her to accompany him to wall , the custom of her people dictates that , because he has saved her life , she is nonetheless obliged to follow him . upon parting company with the ship and its crew , tristran and yvaine set off for wall , and , after several adventures , encounter madam semele . because of the witch-queen 's curse , madam semele is unable to see yvaine , but she agrees to transport tristran the rest of the way to wall , as she is on her way to the market herself . tristran obtains a promise from madam semele that he will not be harmed , will receive board and lodging , and will arrive at wall in the same manner and condition in which he departed . this promise , however , does not prevent her from transforming him into a dormouse for the duration of the journey . the star also rides on madam semele 's wagon , unbeknownst to the old woman . septimus seeks revenge on the witch-queen for killing primus , but is himself killed by his intended victim , without ever reclaiming the topaz . tristran ( now returned to his human form ) , yvaine , madam semele and the witch-queen all arrive at the wall market . tristran leaves yvaine and crosses back into wall , to tell victoria that he has returned with the star . meanwhile , yvaine realises she has fallen in love with tristran and , if he fulfills his promise to bring her to victoria , she will not only lose him to another woman , but upon leaving faerie , will be transformed into a piece of rock . upon meeting tristran , a dismayed victoria ( who is a month or two pregnant but does not yet know it ) reveals she is already engaged to monday , tristran 's old employer , and that she never believed that tristran would fulfill his promise . she regretfully tells tristran that she will keep her promise and marry him . tristran , not wishing to force victoria to marry him against her will , reminds her the promise was n't to marry him , it was to give him anything he desired , and that he desires that she marry her own love , monday . tristran returns to yvaine at the fair . she is delighted to learn that victoria is to be married to someone else , and tristran reveals that he returns her love for him . una informs madam semele that she will soon be free , as her enslavement ends when the moon loses her child ( yvaine ) , if it happens in a week when two mondays come together ( the marriage of victoria and monday ) . the silver chain that binds una finally fades away , and she demands payment for her services , which madam semele must give on pain of losing her powers . una seeks out tristran and yvaine and reveals her true identity as lady una , only daughter of the eighty-first lord of stormhold , and tristran 's mother , and thus tristran is rightfully the last male heir of stormhold . she instructs tristran to ask yvaine for the topaz she carries , and through its magic the power of stormhold passes to tristran . however he declines to immediately return to stormhold , leaving lady una to reign in his stead while he and yvaine travel around faerie . but before yvaine and tristran can set off on their journey , an impossibly aged hag turns up wishing to speak to yvaine . she reveals herself as the witch-queen , but yvaine , no longer fearful , tells her the good news that she has given her heart to tristran . the witch-queen claims she 'd have done better to give it to the lillim , since tristran is sure to break it as all men do . the witch-queen then leaves them forever , fearful of the cruelty her sisters will inflict upon her for failing . many years later , tristran and yvaine finally return to stormhold , and tristran assumes his duties as the lord of stormhold . when he eventually grows old and dies , yvaine continues to reign as the immortal ruler of stormhold . publication history . stardust was originally conceived by gaiman and vess as a '' story book with pictures '' , created by both , to be published by american company dc comics . during an interview to be included in the audio book , neil gaiman explained how one day while driving he had seen a wall on the side of the road and had conceived the idea of faerie being behind the wall . this sparked an idea in gaiman 's head about an american novelist who moved to england where he would find out about this wall ; at this time , the book was to be called wall . soon afterwards , gaiman was nominated for a literary award , which he won , and at a celebratory party for the award he saw a shooting star and immediately came up with the idea of stardust . gaiman dragged vess out of a party that he was at and outlined the plot to him and vess agreed to do the illustrations . initially , stardust was released in 1997 as a prestige format four-issue comic mini-series . stardust came out once a month in a square-bound , high-gloss booklet with high grade paper , high quality color and no advertisements . gaiman and vess originally intended the story to be released complete , as a single book , which would better reproduce the painted illustrations of vess and be a '' story book '' for all ages , and a release in this format was made in 1998 . there was both a hardback and a trade paperback edition . it is more accurately titled neil gaiman and charles vess ' stardust ( being a romance within the realms of faerie ) . the hardback edition is quarter-bound in faux leather with the author 's names , title and several stars inlaid in foil . it also has reproductions of the serialized version 's covers and many sketches by vess . the trade paperback has a very different cover design and illustrations by vess , and has subsequently been reprinted with another different cover design . gaiman retains the copyright to the text and in 1999 decided , encouraged by publisher avon , to publish stardust as a conventional novel in hardback without illustrations . there was also a subsequent uk hardcover edition , from hodder headline . the book also proved popular with readers of the '' romance '' genre , although it is generally considered part of the fantasy genre . thus the paperback publication was originally given three different covers which when placed side by side had one background image and a different primary image including a handsome man holding a woman in a passionate embrace , although this cover concept was never used . in 1999 , charles vess ' green man press produced a portfolio as a benefit for charles vess ' wife karen , injured in a car accident , titled a fall of stardust , which contained two chapbooks and a series of art plates . the first chapbook , written by gaiman , comprised '' wall : a prologue '' short story , '' septimus ' triolet '' poem , '' song of the little hairy man '' , and '' the old warlock 's reverie : a pantoum '' poem . the second chapbook was a short story entitled the duke of wellington misplaces his horse by susanna clarke . art plates were illustrated by william stout , mike mignola , terri windling , bryan talbot , jill thompson , paul chadwick , p . craig russell , mark crilley , elizabeth johns , michael zulli , robin mullins , lisa snellings , terry moore , tony diterlizzi , linda medley , lorenzo mattotti , zander cannon , dave mckean , jeff smith , trina robbins & steve leialoha , gary gianni , janine johnston , stan sakai , michael kaluta , moebius , rebecca guay , geof darrow , brian froud and charles vess . several plates were coloured by eric olive . todd klein worked with charles vess to create the unique logo . those who order this collection directly from green man press received an additional art plate by sergio aragonés . in july 2007 , a new hardcover edition was published by dc 's vertigo imprint , containing approximately fifty pages of new material , including new artwork and information on the production of the book . musical comedian tim minchin expressed interest in the idea of adapting the story into a stage musical during a facebook live q & a for the guardian in october 2017 while discussing matilda the musical . . cultural references . towards the end of the novel , it is mentioned that tristran was rumoured to have been instrumental in breaking the power of the unseelie court . neil gaiman ( 1999 ) stardust . london , headline/review . p.194 in scottish folklore , faeries are often divided into the seelie and unseelie courts , the seelie being the faeries benevolently inclined towards humans and the unseelie being the malevolent or mischievous faeries . katharine mary briggs ( 1976 ) an encyclopedia of fairies , hobgoblins , brownies , boogies , and other supernatural creatures . new york , pantheon books . '' seelie court '' , p.353 . . awards . the original dc comics series was nominated for the comics buyer 's guide fan awards for favorite limited series for 1998 and 1999 . '' 17th annual comics buyers guide fan awards ( 1999 ) , '' hahn library . accessed jan . 22 , 2020 . 16th annual comic buyers guide fan awards ( 1998 ) , '' hahn library . accessed jan . 22 , 2020 . the collected edition of the series was also nominated for the comics buyer 's guide fan award for favorite reprint graphic album for 1999 . in 1999 , the mythopoeic society awarded it the mythopoeic awards . the novel was nominated for the locus award that same year . in 2000 , it received an alex award from the american library association . . citations . external links . stardust on neilgaiman.com neil gaiman : adults deserve good fairy tales , too stardust at worlds without end cover art history at upcoming4.me it : stardust ( romanzo )