MSN

news . microsoft news ( previously named msn news and bing news ) is a news aggregator and service that features news headlines and articles chosen by editors . the app includes sections for top stories , u.s . , world , money , technology , entertainment , opinion , sports , and crime , along with other miscellaneous stories . it allows users to set their own personalized favorite topics and sources , receive notifications of breaking news though alerts , filter preferred news sources , and alter font sizes to make articles easier to read . originally , news included an rss feed , but that capability was removed ; microsoft currently only allows users to subscribe to specified news sources , thereby curating news . news uses the chaseable live tile feature introduced in the windows 10 anniversary update . if a user clicks on the news start menu tile when a particular story is shown , the user will see a link to that story at the top of the app when it launches . . weather . msn weather ( originally named bing weather ) shows weather from a user 's current location or any other location worldwide , and it allows users to define their favorite places , which will synchronize back to the web portal and across devices . users can pin weather tiles to the start menu to see local weather conditions from multiple locations at a glance . it also offers satellite maps and has information regarding ski resorts . the app receives its weather conditions and forecasts from a variety of sources internationally . weather uses weather conditions as the background , making it the only app that does not have a light/dark switch in windows 10 . weather is not available for ios ; however , it comes preinstalled on the nokia 215 phone from microsoft mobile that runs series 30+ ; it is currently the only feature phone to have the app built-in . . sports . msn sports ( originally named bing sports ) displays various sports scores and standings from hundreds of leagues around the world , as well as aggregating sports-related articles and news headlines . sports also allows the user to view slideshows and photo galleries , look up information about individual players and fantasy sport , and set and track their favorite teams by selecting various topics from the hamburger menu . it also powers various predictive features within microsoft 's cortana virtual assistant . . money . msn money ( originally named bing finance ) allows users to set up lists of stocks to watch , follow certain corporations and receive stock updates , get the latest headlines regarding stock markets , view real-time trading figures with a 30-minute delay , track their own personal finances , calculate mortgages , get information on commodity and bonds , and convert currency . . discontinued apps . . food & drink . msn food & drink ( originally named bing food & drink ) is a discontinued recipe app that offers news related to food and drink , a personal shopping list that synchronizes across devices and the web , and a wine encyclopedia that contains information on over 1.5million wine bottle , over 3.3million wine tasting , and hundreds of cocktail recipes . users can control the app hands-free , add their own recipes from physical cookbooks or personal recipes by snapping a photo , add notes to recipes , and sort the recipes into collections . the app also collects information from famous chefs and lists them according to their style of cuisine . . health & fitness . msn health & fitness ( originally named bing health & fitness ) allowed users to track their intake of calories , look up nutritional information for hundreds of thousands of different foods , use a built-in gps tracker , view step-by-step workouts and exercises with images and videos , check symptoms for various health conditions , and synchronize their health data to third-party devices such as activity trackers . msn health & fitness formerly connected data with the microsoft healthvault , but it started using a microsoft account with msn 's own cloud service to synchronize data when it was rebranded from bing to msn . the app is not related in any way to microsoft 's xbox fitness or microsoft health ( the companion app for the microsoft band ) , despite being similar in function . . travel . msn travel ( originally named bing travel ) was a travel website that allows users to book hotels and flights , aggregates travel-related headlines , and offers detailed information about thousands of travel destinations . data in the app is powered by various travel websites , including expedia , formerly owned by microsoft . other features include finding information on local restaurants , viewing pictures ( including panoramas ) and historical data about destinations , and reading reviews by previous travelers . if the user is signed in , cortana can track flights and get hotel information through the app . msn travel was the only app in the suite that was exclusive to windows . the app was discontinued in september 2015 but can still be accessed via the web . previously , microsoft had acquired farecast in 2008 , a website in the computer reservations system industry that offered predictions regarding the best time to purchase airline tickets . farecast was founded in 2003 and collected over 175 billion airfare observations by 2007 . farecast 's team of data miners used these airfare observations to build algorithms to predict future airfare price movements . microsoft integrated it as part of its live search group of tools in may 2008 as live search farecast ; microsoft rebranded it as bing travel on june 3 , 2009 , as part of its efforts to create a new search identity . in 2009 , there were allegations that bing travel had copied its layouts from kayak.com ; microsoft denied the allegations . by january 2013 , bing travel results were powered by kayak.com . as of january 2014 , the fare prediction feature had been removed . as of may 2015 , microsoft rebranded the service to msn travel . in august 2015 , msn travel flight search pages changed from being powered by kayak.com to its competitor skyscanner . older mobile apps . microsoft first offered content from its msn web portal on mobile devices in the early 2000s , through a service it called pocket msn ( in line with its pocket pc products of the era ) and later renamed msn mobile . the original msn mobile software was preloaded on many cell phones and pdas , and usually provided access to legacy msn services like blogs ( msn spaces ) , email ( hotmail ) , instant messaging ( msn messenger ) , and web search ( now called bing ) . some wireless carriers charged a premium to access it . as many former msn properties were spun off to bing , windows live , and other successors in late 2000s , the microsoft mobile services division took over the development of mobile apps related to those services . in the meantime , microsoft 's msn apps took on a more content-related focus , as did the web portal itself . previous versions of msn apps that were bundled with windows mobile and early versions of windows phone , as well as msn apps for android and ios devices in the early 2010s , were primarily repositories for news articles found on msn.com . other earlier msn mobile apps included versions of msn weather and msn money for windows mobile 6.5 , and 'msn money stocks ' and a men 's magazine called 'msn onit ' for windows phone 7 . . international . microsoft 's world headquarters is in the united states , so the main msn website is based there . however , msn has offered various international versions of its portal since its inception in 1995 for dozens of countries around the world . a list of international msn affiliates is available at msn worldwide . following the redesign and relaunch of the msn web portal in 2014 , most international msn websites share the same layout as the u.s . website and are largely indistinguishable from it , aside from their content . there were two exceptions : ninemsn , a longtime partnership between microsoft and the nine network in australia that launched in 1997 ( microsoft sold its stake in the venture and 2013 and ended its co-branding with nine in 2016 ) ; and msn china , an entirely customized version of msn for china ( microsoft discontinued the portal in 2016 , replacing it with a page that links to a number of other chinese websites ) .