Hydrometer

history . thumb the hydrometer probably dates back to the greek philosopher archimedes ( 3rd century bc ) who used its principles to find the density of various liquids . ian spencer hornsey , a history of beer and brewing , royal society of chemistry · 2003 , page 429 jeanne bendick , archimedes and the door of science , literary licensing , llc · 2011 , pages 63-64 an early description of a hydrometer comes from a latin poem , written in the 2nd century ad by remnius , who compared the use of a hydrometer to the method of fluid displacement used by archimedes to determine the gold content of hiero ii 's crown . hypatia of alexandria ( 4th-5th century ad ) , an important female greek mathematician , is the first person traditionally associated with the hydrometer . in a letter , synesius asks hypatia , his teacher , to make a hydrometer for him : the instrument in question is a cylindrical tube , which has the shape of a flute and is about the same size . it has notches in a perpendicular line , by means of which we are able to test the weight of the waters . a cone forms a lid at one of the extremities , closely fitted to the tube . the cone and the tube have one base only . this is called the baryllium . whenever you place the tube in water , it remains erect . you can then count the notches at your ease , and in this way ascertain the weight of the water . according to the encyclopedia of the history of arabic science , it was used by abū rayhān al-bīrūnī in the 11th century and described by al-khazini in the 12th century . it was rediscovered in 1612 by galileo and his circle of friends , and used in experiments especially at the accademia del cimento . it appeared again in the 1675 work of robert boyle ( who coined the name '' hydrometer '' ) , with types devised by antoine baumé ( the baumé scale ) , william nicholson , and jacques charles in the late 18th century , more or less contemporarily with benjamin sikes ' discovery of the device by which the alcoholic content of a liquid can be automatically determined . the use of the sikes device was made obligatory by british law in 1818 . . ranges . the hydrometer sinks deeper in low-density liquids such as kerosene , gasoline , and ethanol , and less deep in high-density liquids such as brine , milk , and acids . it is usual for hydrometers to be used with dense liquids to have the mark 1.000 ( for water ) near the top of the stem , and those for use with lighter liquids to have 1.000 near the bottom . in many industries a set of hydrometers is used ( 1.0 & ndash ; 0.95 , 0.95 & ndash ; . ) to have instruments covering the range of specific gravities that may be encountered . scales . modern hydrometers usually measure specific gravity but different scales were ( and sometimes still are ) used in certain industries . examples include : api gravity , universally used worldwide by the petroleum industry . baumé scale , formerly used in industrial chemistry and pharmacology brix scale , primarily used in fruit juice , wine making and the sugar industry oechsle scale , used for measuring the density of grape must plato scale , primarily used in brewing twaddell scale , formerly used in the bleaching and dyeing industries . specialized hydrometers . specialized hydrometers are frequently named for their use : a lactometer , for example , is a hydrometer designed especially for use with dairy products . they are sometimes referred to by this specific name , sometimes as hydrometers . alcoholometer . an alcoholmeter is a hydrometer that indicates the alcoholic strength of liquids which are essentially a mixture of alcohol and water . it is also known as a alcoholic proof ( after johann georg tralles , but commonly misspelled as traille and tralle ) . it measures the density of the fluid . certain assumptions are made to estimate the amount of alcohol present in the fluid . alcoholometers have scales marked with volume percents of '' potential alcohol '' , based on a pre-calculated specific gravity . a higher '' potential alcohol '' reading on this scale is caused by a greater specific gravity , assumed to be caused by the introduction of dissolved sugars or carbohydrate based material . a reading is taken before and after fermentation and approximate alcohol content is determined by subtracting the post fermentation reading from the pre-fermentation reading . . lactometer . a lactometer is used to check purity of cow 's milk . the specific gravity of milk does not give a conclusive indication of its composition since milk contains a variety of substances that are either heavier or lighter than water . additional tests for fat content are necessary to determine overall composition . the instrument is graduated into a hundred parts . milk is poured in and allowed to stand until the cream has formed , then the depth of the cream deposit in degrees determines the quality of the milk . if the milk sample is pure , the lactometer floats ; if it is adulterated or impure , the lactometer sinks . saccharometer . a saccharometer is a hydrometer used for determining the amount of sugar in a solution , invented by thomas thomson . explanation of allan 's saccharometer : appointed by act of parliament for the . , thomas thomson it is used primarily by winemakers and brewing , and it can also be used in making sorbets and ice-creams . the first brewers ' saccharometer was constructed by benjamin martin ( with distillation in mind ) , and initially used for brewing by james baverstock sr in 1770 . henry thrale adopted its use and it was later popularized by john richardson in 1784 . it consists of a large weighted glass bulb with a thin stem rising from the top with calibrated markings . the sugar level can be determined by reading the value where the surface of the liquid crosses the scale . the higher the sugar content , the denser the solution , and thus the higher the bulb will float . thermohydrometer . a thermohydrometer is a hydrometer that has a thermometer enclosed in the float section . for measuring the density of petroleum products , such as fuel oils , the specimen is usually heated in a temperature jacket with a thermometer placed behind it since density is dependent on temperature . light oils are placed in cooling jackets , typically at 15 & nbsp ; °c . very light oils with many volatile components are measured in a variable volume container using a floating piston sampling device to minimize light end losses . . battery hydrometer . the state of charge of a lead-acid battery can be estimated from the density of the sulfuric acid solution used as electrolyte . a hydrometer calibrated to read specific gravity relative to water at is a standard tool for servicing car battery . tables are used to correct the reading to the standard temperature . hydrometers are also used for maintenance of wet-cell nickel-cadmium batteries to ensure the electrolyte is of the proper strength for the application ; for this battery chemistry the specific gravity of the electrolyte is not related to the state of charge of the battery . a battery hydrometer with thermometer ( thermohydrometer ) measures the temperature-compensated specific gravity and electrolyte temperature . antifreeze tester . another automotive use of hydrometers is testing the quality of the antifreeze solution used for engine cooling . the degree of freeze protection can be related to the density ( and so concentration ) of the antifreeze ; different types of antifreeze have different relations between measured density and freezing point . acidometer . an acidometer ( sometimes spelled acidimeter ) is a hydrometer used to measure the specific gravity of an acid . . barkometer . a barkometer is calibrated to test the strength of tanning liquors used in tanning leather . charles thomas davis , . salinometer . a salinometer is a hydrometer used to measure the salt content of the feed water to a marine steam boiler . urinometer . a urinometer is a medical hydrometer designed for urinalysis . as urine 's specific gravity is dictated by its ratio of solutes ( wastes ) to water , a urinometer makes it possible to quickly assess a patient 's overall level of hydration . gallery . hydrometer in a still ( cropped ) . jpg an alcohol meter in a still . densimetro o galattometro con custodia - musei del cibo - parmigiano - 314a.jpg lactometer battery condition indicator.jpg battery condition indicator to measure the charge of the battery ( ~1985 ) . coolant indicator.jpg antifreeze tester measures the freezing point of engine coolant . . use in soil analysis . a hydrometer analysis is the process by which fine-grained soils , silts and clays , are graded . hydrometer analysis is performed if the grain sizes are too small for sieve analysis . the basis for this test is stoke 's law for falling spheres in a viscous fluid in which the terminal velocity of fall depends on the grain diameter and the densities of the grain in suspension and of the fluid . the grain diameter thus can be calculated from a knowledge of the distance and time of fall . the hydrometer also determines the specific gravity ( or density ) of the suspension , and this enables the percentage of particles of a certain equivalent particle diameter to be calculated . fakhry a . assaad , philip elmer lamoreaux , travis h . hughes ( ed . ) , field methods for geologists and hydrogeologists , springer science & business media , 2004 , p.299 . see also . dasymeter elevator paradox ( physics ) fahrenheit hydrometer gravity ( beer ) oscillating u-tube pyknometer . references . sources . hypatia of alexandria hydrometer information guide to brewing hydrometers jurjen draaijer . milk testing . milk producer group resource book , food and agriculture organization of the united nations using your hydrometer , winemaking home page . how the hydrometer works , home winemaking techniques