Helmut Newton

early life . newton was born in berlin , the son of klara '' claire '' ( née marquis ) and max neustädter , a button factory owner . his family was jewish . newton attended the heinrich von treitschke-realgymnasium and the american school in berlin . interested in photography from the age of 12 when he purchased his first camera , he worked for the german photographer yva ( elsie neuländer simon ) from 1936 . the increasingly oppressive restrictions placed on jews by the nuremberg laws meant that his father lost control of the factory in which he manufactured buttons and buckles ; he was briefly interned in a concentration camp on kristallnacht , 9 november 1938 , which finally compelled the family to leave germany . newton 's parents fled to argentina . he was issued with a passport just after turning 18 and left germany on 5 december 1938 . at trieste he boarded the conte rosso ( along with about 200 others escaping the nazis ) , intending to journey to china . after arriving in singapore he found he was able to remain there , first briefly as a photographer for the straits times and then as a portrait photographer . from 1940 : life in australia . newton was interned by british authorities while in singapore and was sent to australia on board the queen mary , arriving in sydney on 27 september 1940 . neumann , klaus . in the interests of national security , national archives of australia internees travelled to the camp at tatura , victoria , by train under armed guard . he was released from internment in 1942 and briefly worked as a fruit picker in northern victoria . in august 1942 , he enlisted with the australian army and worked as a truck driver . after the war in 1945 , he became a british subject and changed his name to newton in 1946 . in 1948 , he married actress june browne , who performed under the stage name june brunell . she later became a successful photographer under the ironic pseudonym alice springs ( after alice springs , the central australian town ) . in 1946 , newton set up a studio in fashionable flinders lane in melbourne and worked on fashion , theatre and industrial photography in the affluent postwar years . helmut newton 's australian years - guy featherstone . the latrobe journal , no 76 spring 2005 he shared his first joint exhibition in may 1953 with wolfgang sievers , a german refugee like himself , who had also served in the same company . the exhibition of 'new visions in photography ' was displayed at the federal hotel in collins street and was probably the first glimpse of new objectivity photography in australia . newton went into partnership with henry talbot , a fellow german jew who had also been interned at tatura , and his association with the studio continued even after 1957 , when he left australia for london . the studio was renamed 'helmut newton and henry talbot ' . late 1950s : to london , europe , a return to australia . newton 's growing reputation as a fashion photographer was rewarded when he secured a commission to illustrate fashions in a special australian supplement for vogue magazine , published in january 1956 . he won a 12-month contract with british vogue and left for london in february 1957 , leaving talbot to manage the business . newton left the magazine before the end of his contract and went to paris , where he worked for french and german magazines . he returned to melbourne in march 1959 to a contract for australian vogue . 1961 : to paris . newton and wife finally settled in paris in 1961 and the work continued as a fashion photographer . his images appeared in magazines including the french edition of vogue and harper 's bazaar . he established a particular style marked by erotic , stylised scenes , often with sado-masochistic and fetishistic subtexts . a heart attack in 1970 reduced newton 's output , nevertheless his wife 's encouragement led to his profile continuing to expand , especially with a big success , the 1980 studio-bound stark infinity of the '' big nudes '' series . his '' naked and dressed '' portfolio followed and in 1992 '' domestic nudes '' which marked the pinnacle of his erotic-urban style , these series all underpinned with the prowess of his technical skills . helmut newton : the photography icon . essay by peter kuzmin , july 2017 newton also worked in portraiture and more fantastical studies . newton shot a number of pictorials for playboy , including pictorials of nastassja kinski and kristine debell . newton , helmut . playboy : helmut newton , chronicle books ( 2005 ) . original prints of the photographs from his august 1976 pictorial of debell , '' 200 motels , or how i spent my summer vacation '' were sold at auctions of playboy archives by bonhams in 2002 for 21,075 , and by christie 's in december 2003 for 26,290 . . '' three boys from pasadena '' . in 2009 , june browne conceptualised a tribute exhibition to newton , based on three photographers that befriended newton in los angeles in 1980 : mark arbeit , just loomis , and george holz . all three had been photography students at the art center college of design in pasadena , california . all three became friends with helmut and june newton and to varying degrees assisted helmut newton . each went on to independent careers . the exhibit premiered at the helmut newton foundation in berlin and combined the work of all three with personal snapshots , contact sheets , and letters from their time with newton . . death . thumb in his later life , newton lived in both monte carlo and los angeles , california where he wintered at the chateau marmont , which he had done every year since 1957 . on 23 january 2004 he suffered a serious heart-attack while driving his automobile down marmont lane from the chateau marmont to sunset boulevard . he was taken to cedars-sinai medical center where doctors were unable to save him and he was pronounced dead . his ashes are buried three plots down from the grave of marlene dietrich at the städtischer friedhof iii in berlin . published works , during his life . helmut newton , white women , new york : congreve , 1976 . helmut newton , sleepless nights , new york : congreve , 1978 . helmut newton , big nudes , paris : editions du regard , 1981 . helmut newton , they 're coming ! , paris : french vogue , 1981 . ( this is one of his numerous editorials in french vogue , that 's not a book ) helmut newton , world without men , new york : xavier moreau , 1984 . klaus honnef & helmut newton , helmut newton : portraits , schirmer art books , 1986 . marshall blonsky & helmut newton , private property , schirmer art books , 1989 . helmut newton , sumo book , taschen , 1999 . helmut newton & june newton , helmut newton work , edited by manfred heiting , taschen , 2000 . helmut newton , autobiography , nan a . talese , 2003 . published works , after his death . helmut newton , a gun for hire , edited by june newton , taschen , 2005 . helmut newton , playboy : helmut newton , chronicle books , 2005 . guy featherstone , 'helmut newton 's australian years ' , in the la trobe journal , the state library of victoria foundation , no 76 , spring , 2005 . klaus neumann , in the interest of national security : civilian internment in australia during world war ii , canberra : national archives of australia , 2006 . references . external links . helmut newton foundation in berlin helmut newton at photogpedia helmut newton at phinnweb pictures made by helmut newton photo of the memorial plate at the birthplace of newton in berlin-schöneberg , innsbrucker straße 24 helmut newton 's portfolio ( 213 photos ) more helmut newton photographs melbourne post-war photography , state library of victoria , australia pirelli kalender-entwurf von 1986 helmut newton sumo helmut newton london exhibition helmut newton 100 years