Ring-tailed cat

description . the ringtail is black to dark brown in color with pale underparts . ringtails have a pointed muzzle with long whiskers resembles that of a fox ( its latin name means ‘ clever little fox ’ ) and its body that resembles that of a cat . the ringtailed 's face resembles a mask as dark brown and black hair surround its eyes . these animals are characterized by a long black and white '' ringed '' tail with 14–16 stripes , which is the about the same length as its body . the claws are short , straight , and semi-retractable , well-suited for climbing . smaller than a cat , it is one of the smallest extant procyonids ( only the smallest in the olingo species group average smaller ) . its body alone measures and its tail averages from its base . it typically weighs around . hunter , luke ( 2011 ) carnivores of the world , princeton university press , its dental formula is 40 . ringtails are primarily nocturnal , with large eyes and upright ears that make it easier for them to navigate and forage in the dark . an adept climber , it uses its long tail for balance . the rings on its tail can also act as a distraction for predators . the white rings act as a target , so when the tail rather than the body is caught , the ringtail has a greater chance of escaping . bibliography gilbert , bil . '' ringtails . '' smithsonian 2000 ( 5 ) : 65-70 . proquest . web . 2 apr . 2015 . ringtails have occasionally been hunted for their fur , but the fur is not especially valuable . fur trapping has slowed down considerably , but current population sizes and growth rates remain unclear . . ecology . in areas with a bountiful source of water , as many as 50 ringtails/sq . mile ( 20/km 2 ) have been found . ranging from , the territories of male ringtails occasionally intersect with several females . gilbert , bil . '' ringtails . '' smithsonian 08 2000 : 65-70 . proquest . web . 2 apr . 2015 . it has been suggested that ringtails use feces as a way to mark territory . in 2003 , a study done in mexico city found that ringtails tended to defecate in similar areas in a seemingly nonrandom pattern , mimicking that of other carnivores that utilized excretions to mark territories . barja i , list r . 2006 . faecal marking behaviour in ringtails ( bassariscus astutus ) during the non-breeding period : spatial characteristics of latrines and single faeces . chemoecology . 16 : 219–222 . ringtails prefer a solitary existence but may share a den or be found mutually grooming one another . they exhibit limited interaction except during the breeding season , which occurs in the early spring . ringtails can survive for long periods on water derived from food alone , and have urine which is more concentrated than any other mammal studied , an adaptation that allows for maximum water retention . schoenherr , allen a . 1992 . a natural history of california . university of california press . p . 386 foxes , coyotes , raccoons , bobcats , hawks , and owls will opportunistically prey upon ringtails of all ages , though predominantly on younger , more vulnerable specimens . also occasional prey to coatis , lynxes , and mountain lions , the ringtail is rather adept at avoiding predators . the ringtail 's success in deterring potential predators is largely attributed to its ability to excrete musk when startled or threatened . the main predators of the ringtail are the great horned owl and the red-tailed hawk . . range and habitat . the ringtail is found in the southwestern united states in southern oregon , california , eastern kansas , oklahoma , arizona , new mexico , colorado , southern nevada , utah , and texas . in mexico it ranges from the northern desert state of baja california to oaxaca . its distribution overlaps that of b . sumichrasti in the mexican states of guerrero , oaxaca and veracruz . fossils assigned to b . astutus have been found as far north as washington , dating back to the early pliocene era . it has been reported to be living in western louisiana , although no conclusive evidence has been found to support this . the ringtail is the state mammal of arizona . it is commonly found in rocky desert habitats , where it nests in the hollows of trees or abandoned wooden structures . the ringtail has been found throughout the great basin desert , which stretches over several states ( nevada , utah , california , idaho , and oregon ) as well as the sonoran desert in arizona , and the chihuahuan desert in new mexico , texas , and northern mexico . the ringtail also prefers rocky habitats associated with water , such as the riparian canyons , caves , or mine shafts . the ankle joint is flexible and is able to rotate over 180 degrees , making it an agile climber . their long tail provides balance for negotiating narrow ledges and limbs , even allowing them to reverse directions by performing a cartwheel . ringtails also can ascend narrow passages by stemming ( pressing all feet on one wall and their back against the other or pressing both right feet on one wall and both left feet on the other ) , and wider cracks or openings by ricocheting between the walls . file : bassariscus.jpg two ringtails file : bassariscus astutus ( ringtail ) -11297651994.jpg ringtail den file : squaw-ringtail-28112.jpg ringtail in phoenix , arizona . habits . they produce a variety of sounds , including clicks and chatters reminiscent of raccoons . a typical call is a very loud , plaintive bark . as adults , these mammals lead solitary lives , generally coming together only to mate . ringtails have been reported to exhibit fecal marking behavior as a form of intraspecific communication to define territory boundaries or attract potential mates . . diet . small vertebrates such as passerina , rats , mice , squirrels , rabbits , snakes , lizards , frogs , and toads are the most important foods during winters . however , the ringtail is omnivorous , as are all procyonids . berries and insects are important in the diet year-round , and become the primary part of the diet in spring and summer , along with other fruit . ringtail ( bassariscus astutus ) . nsrl.ttu.edu . retrieved on april 17 , 2013 . as an omnivore the ringtail enjoys a variety of foods in its diet , the majority of which is made up of animal matter . insects and small mammals such as rabbits , mice , rats and ground squirrels are some examples of the ringtail 's carnivorous tendencies . occasionally the ringtail will also eat fish , lizards , birds , snakes and carrion . the ringtail also enjoys juniper , hack and black berries , persimmon , prickly pear , and fruit in general . they have even been observed partaking from hummingbird feeders , sweet nectar or sweetened water . in one study the scat of ringtails located on the island of san jose were analyzed . the results showed that the ringtail tended to prey on whatever was most abundant during each respective season . during the spring time the ringtail 's diet consisted largely of insects , showing up in about 50 % of the analyzed feces . small rodents , snakes and some species of lizard were also present . plant matter also presented in large amounts , around 59 % of the collected feces contained some type of plant . the fruits phaulothamnus , lycium and solanum were the most common . characterized by their large amount of seeds , and ironwood leaves , these fleshy fruits were an obvious favorite of the ringtail . rodríguez-estrella , ricardo , angel rodríguez moreno , and karina g . tam . '' spring diet of the endemic ring-tailed cat ( bassariscus astutus insulicola ) population on an island in the gulf of california , mexico . '' journal of arid environments . 2nd ed . vol . 44 . n.p . : n.p . , n.d . 241-46 . print . . reproduction . ringtails mate in the spring . the gestation period is 45–50 days , during which the male will procure food for the female . there will be 2–4 cubs in a litter . the cubs open their eyes after a month , and will hunt for themselves after four months . they reach sexual maturity at ten months . the ringtail 's lifespan in the wild is about seven years . domestication . the ringtail is said to be easily tamed , and can make an affectionate pet , and effective mouser . miners and settlers once kept pet ringtails to keep their cabins free of vermin ; hence , the common name of '' miner 's cat '' ( though in fact the ring-tail is in the procyonidae ) . ringtails in redwood park the ringtails would move into the miners ' and settlers ' encampments and become accepted by humans in much the same way that some early domestic cats were theorized to have done . at least one biologist in oregon has joked that the ringtail is one of two species – the domestic cat and the ringtail – that thus '' domesticated humans '' due to that pattern of behavior . often a hole was cut in a small box and placed near a heat source ( perhaps a stove ) as a dark , warm place for the animal to sleep during the day , coming out after dark to rid the cabin of mice . references . further reading . nowak , ronald m . ( 2005 ) . walker 's carnivores of the world . baltimore : johns hopkins university press . external links . bassariscus astutus – animal diversity web smithsonian institution – north american mammals : bassariscus astutus