Andromeda (constellation)

history and mythology . the uranography of andromeda has its roots most firmly in the greek tradition , though a female figure in andromeda 's location had appeared earlier in babylonian astronomy . the stars that make up pisces and the middle portion of modern andromeda formed a constellation representing a fertility goddess , sometimes named as anunitum or the lady of the heavens . andromeda is known as '' the chained lady '' or '' the chained woman '' in english . it was known as mulier catenata ( '' chained woman '' ) in latin and al-mar'at al musalsalah in arabic . it has also been called persea ( '' perseus 's wife '' ) or cepheis ( '' cepheus 's daughter '' ) , all names that refer to andromeda 's role in the greco-roman myth of perseus , in which cassiopeia , the queen of ethiopia , bragged that her daughter was more beautiful than the nereids , sea nymphs blessed with incredible beauty . offended at her remark , the nymphs petitioned poseidon to punish cassiopeia for her insolence , which he did by commanding the sea monster cetus to attack ethiopia . andromeda 's panicked father , cepheus , was told by the oracle of ammon that the only way to save his kingdom was to sacrifice his daughter to cetus . she was chained to a rock by the sea but was saved by the hero perseus , who in one version of the story used the head of medusa to turn the monster into stone ; in another version , by the roman poet ovid in his metamorphoses , perseus slew the monster with his diamond sword . perseus and andromeda then married ; the myth recounts that the couple had nine children together & nbsp ; – seven sons and two daughters & nbsp ; – and founded mycenae and its persideae dynasty . after andromeda 's death athena placed her in the sky as a constellation , to honor her . three of the neighboring constellations ( perseus , cassiopeia and cepheus ) represent characters in the perseus myth , while cetus retreats to beyond pisces . it is connected with the constellation pegasus . andromeda was one of the original 48 constellations formulated by ptolemy in his 2nd-century almagest , in which it was defined as a specific pattern of stars . she is typically depicted with α andromedae as her head , ο and λ andromedae as her chains , and δ , π , μ , β , and γ her body and legs . however , there is no universal depiction of andromeda and the stars used to represent her body , head , and chains . arab astronomers were aware of ptolemy 's constellations , but they included a second constellation representing a fish at andromeda 's feet . several stars from andromeda and most of the stars in lacerta were combined in 1787 by german astronomer johann bode to form frederici honores ( also called friedrichs ehre ) . it was designed to honor frederick the great , but quickly fell into disuse . since the time of ptolemy , andromeda has remained a constellation and is officially recognized by the international astronomical union . like all those that date back to a pattern known to ptolemy , it is attributed to a wider zone and thus many surrounding stars . in 1922 , the iau defined its recommended three-letter abbreviation , '' and '' . the official boundaries of andromeda were defined in 1930 by belgian astronomer eugène delporte as a polygon of 36 segments . its right ascension is between 22 h 57.5 m and 2 h 39.3 m and its declination is between 53.19° and 21.68° in the equatorial coordinate system . in non-western astronomy . in traditional chinese astronomy , nine stars from andromeda ( including beta andromedae , mu andromedae , and nu andromedae ) , along with seven stars from pisces , formed an elliptical constellation called '' legs '' ( 奎宿 ) . this constellation either represented the foot of a walking person or a wild boar . gamma andromedae and its neighbors were called '' teen ta tseang keun '' ( 天大将军 , heaven 's great general ) , representing honor in astrology and a great general in mythology . alpha andromedae and gamma pegasi together made '' wall '' ( 壁宿 ) , representing the eastern wall of the imperial palace and/or the emperor 's personal library . for the chinese , the northern swath of andromeda formed a stable for changing horses , 天厩 , stable on sky ) and the far western part , along with most of lacerta , became tengshe , a flying snake . an arab constellation called '' al-hut '' ( the fish ) was composed of several stars in andromeda , m31 , and several stars in pisces . ν and , μ and , β and , η and , ζ and , ε and , δ and , π and , and 32 and were all included from andromeda ; ν psc , φ psc , χ psc , and ψ psc were included from pisces . as per hindu astronomy , andromeda is known as devyani constellation while cassiopeia is sharmishta constellation . devyani and sharmishta are wives of king yayati ( perseus constellation ) who is the earliest patriarch of the kuru and yadu clans that are mentioned frequently in epic mahabharat . there is an interesting story of these three characters mentioned in mahabharat . devyani is the daughter of guru shukracharya while shar sharmishtha andromeda galaxy hindi wikipedia hindu legends surrounding andromeda are similar to the greek myths . ancient sanskrit texts depict antarmada chained to a rock , as in the greek myth . scholars believe that the hindu and greek astrological myths were closely linked ; one piece of evidence cited is the similarity between the names '' antarmada '' and '' andromeda '' . andromeda is also associated with the mesopotamian creation story of tiamat , the goddess of chaos . she bore many demons for her husband , apsu , but eventually decided to destroy them in a war that ended when marduk killed her . he used her body to create the constellations as markers of time for humans . in the marshall islands , andromeda , cassiopeia , triangulum , and aries are incorporated into a constellation representing a porpoise . andromeda 's bright stars are mostly in the body of the porpoise ; cassiopeia represents its tail and aries its head . in the tuamotu islands , alpha andromedae was called takurua-e-te-tuki-hanga-ruki , meaning '' star of the wearisome toil '' , and beta andromedae was called piringa-o-tautu . features . stars . α and ( alpheratz , sirrah ) is the brightest star in this constellation . it is an a0p class binary star with an overall apparent visual magnitude of 2.1 and a luminosity of . it is 97 light-years from earth . it represents andromeda 's head in western mythology , however , the star 's traditional arabic names & nbsp ; – alpheratz and sirrah , from the phrase surrat al-faras & nbsp ; – sometimes translated as '' navel of the steed '' . the arabic names are a reference to the fact that α and forms an asterism known as the '' great square of pegasus '' with three stars in pegasus : α , β , and γ peg . as such , the star was formerly considered to belong to both andromeda and pegasus , and was co-designated as '' delta pegasi ( δ peg ) '' , although this name is no longer formally used . β and ( mirach ) is a red-hued giant star of type m0 located in an asterism known as the '' girdle '' . it is 198 light-years away , has a magnitude of 2.06 , and a luminosity of . its name comes from the arabic phrase al-maraqq meaning '' the loins '' or '' the loincloth '' , a phrase translated from ptolemy 's writing . however , β and was mostly considered by the arabs to be a part of al-hut , a constellation representing a larger fish than pisces at andromeda 's feet . γ and ( almach ) is an orange-hued bright giant star of type k3 found at the southern tip of the constellation with an overall magnitude of 2.14 . almach is a multiple star with a yellow primary of magnitude 2.3 and a blue-green secondary of magnitude 5.0 , separated by 9.7 arcseconds . british astronomer william herschel said of the star : '' the striking difference in the colour of the two stars , suggests the idea of a sun and its planet , to which the contrast of their unequal size contributes not a little . '' the secondary , described by herschel as a '' fine light sky-blue , inclining to green '' , is itself a double star , with a secondary of magnitude 6.3 and a period of 61 years . the system is 358 light-years away . almach was named for the arabic phrase ʿanaq al-ard , which means '' the earth-kid '' , an obtuse reference to an animal that aids a lion in finding prey . δ and is an orange-hued giant star of type k3 orange giant of magnitude 3.3 . it is 105 light-years from earth . ι and , κ , λ , ο , and ψ and form an asterism known as '' frederick 's glory '' , a name derived from a former constellation ( frederici honores ) . ι and is a blue-white hued main-sequence star of type b8 , 502 light-years from earth ; κ and is a white-hued main-sequence star of type b9 ivn , 168 light-years from earth ; λ and is a yellow-hued giant star of type g8 , 86 light-years from earth ; ο and is a blue-white hued giant star of type b6 , 679 light-years from earth ; and ψ and is a blue-white hued main-sequence star of type b7 , 988 light-years from earth . μ and is a white-hued main-sequence star of type a5 and magnitude 3.9 . it is 130 light-years away . υ and ( titawin ) is a magnitude 4.1 binary system that consists of one f-type dwarf and an m-type dwarf . the primary star has a planetary system with four confirmed planets , 0.96 times , 14.57 times , 10.19 times and 1.06 the mass of jupiter . the system is 44 light-years from earth . ξ and ( adhil ) is a binary star 217 light-years away . the primary is an orange-hued giant star of type k0 . π and is a blue-white hued binary star of magnitude 4.3 that is 598 light-years away . the primary is a main-sequence star of type b5 . its companion star is of magnitude 8.9 . 51 and ( nembus ) was assigned by johann bayer to perseus , where he designated it '' upsilon persei ( υ per ) '' , but it was moved to andromeda by the international astronomical union . it is 177 light-years from earth and is an orange-hued giant star of type k3 . 54 and was a former designation for φ per . 56 and is an optical binary star . the primary is a yellow-hued giant star of type k0 with an apparent magnitude of 5.7 that is 316 light-years away . the secondary is an orange-hued giant star of type k0 and magnitude 5.9 that is 990 light-years from earth . r and is a mira variable with a period of 409 days . its maximum magnitude is 5.8 and its minimum magnitude is 14.8 , and it is at a distance of 1,250 light-years . there are 6 other mira variables in andromeda . z and is the m-type prototype for its class of variable stars . it ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 12.4 to a maximum of 8.0 . it is 2,720 light-years away . ross 248 ( hh andromedae ) is the ninth-closest star to earth at a distance of 10.3 light-years . it is a red-hued main-sequence by draconis variable star of type m6 . 14 and ( veritate ) is a yellow-hued giant star of type g8 that is 251 light-years away . it has a mass of and a radius of . it has one planet , 14 andromedae b , discovered in 2008 . it orbits at a distance of 0.83 astronomical units from its parent star every 186 days and has a mass of . of the stars brighter than 4th magnitude ( and those with measured luminosity ) , andromeda has a relatively even distribution of evolved and main sequence stars . deep-sky objects . the constellation of andromeda lies well away from the galactic plane , so it does not contain any of the open clusters or bright nebulae of the milky way . because of its distance in the sky from the band of obscuring dust , gas , and abundant stars of our home galaxy , andromeda 's borders contain many visible distant galaxies . the most famous deep-sky object in andromeda is the spiral galaxy cataloged as messier 31 ( m31 ) or ngc 224 but known colloquially as the andromeda galaxy for the constellation . m31 is one of the most distant objects visible to the naked eye , 2.2 & nbsp ; million light-years from earth ( estimates range up to 2.5 million light-years ) . it is seen under a dark , transparent sky as a hazy patch in the north of the constellation . m31 is the largest neighboring galaxy to the milky way and the largest member of the local group of galaxies . in absolute terms , m31 is approximately 200,000 light-years in diameter , twice the size of the milky way . it is an enormous & nbsp ; – 192.4 by 62.2 arcminutes in apparent size & nbsp ; – barred spiral galaxy similar in form to the milky way and at an approximate magnitude of 3.5 , is one of the brightest deep-sky objects in the northern sky . despite being visible to the naked eye , the '' little cloud '' near andromeda 's figure was not recorded until ad 964 , when the arab astronomer al-sufi wrote his book of fixed stars . m31 was first observed in a telescope shortly after its invention , by simon marius in 1612 . the future of the andromeda and milky way galaxies may be interlinked : in about five billion years , the two could potentially begin an andromeda–milky way collision that would spark extensive new star formation . american astronomer edwin hubble included m31 ( then known as the andromeda nebula ) in his groundbreaking 1923 research on galaxies . using the 100-inch hooker telescope at mount wilson observatory in california , he observed cepheid variable stars in m31 during a search for novae , allowing him to determine their distance by using the stars as standard candles . the distance he found was far greater than the size of the milky way , which led him to the conclusion that many similar objects were '' island universes '' on their own . hubble originally estimated that the andromeda galaxy was 900,000 light-years away , but ernst öpik 's estimate in 1925 put the distance closer to 1.5 million light-years . the andromeda galaxy 's two main companions , m32 and m110 ( also known as ngc 221 and ngc 205 , respectively ) are faint elliptical galaxies that lie near it . m32 , visible with a far smaller size of 8.7 by 6.4 arcminutes , compared to m110 , appears superimposed on the larger galaxy in a telescopic view as a hazy smudge , m110 also appears slightly larger and distinct from the larger galaxy ; m32 is 0.5° south of the core , m32 is 1° northwest of the core . m32 was discovered in 1749 by french astronomer guillaume le gentil and has since been found to lie closer to earth than the andromeda galaxy itself . it is viewable in binoculars from a dark site owing to its high surface brightness of 10.1 and overall magnitude of 9.0 . m110 is classified as either a dwarf spheroidal galaxy or simply a generic elliptical galaxy . it is far fainter than m31 and m32 , but larger than m32 with a surface brightness of 13.2 , magnitude of 8.9 , and size of 21.9 by 10.9 arcminutes . the andromeda galaxy has a total of 15 satellite galaxies , including m32 and m110 . nine of these lie in a plane , which has caused astronomers to infer that they have a common origin . these satellite galaxies , like the satellites of the milky way , tend to be older , gas-poor dwarf elliptical and dwarf spheroidal galaxy . along with the andromeda galaxy and its companions , the constellation also features ngc 891 ( caldwell 23 ) , a smaller galaxy just east of almach . it is a barred spiral galaxy seen edge-on , with a dark dust lane visible down the middle . ngc 891 is incredibly faint and small despite its magnitude of 9.9 , as its surface brightness of 14.6 indicates ; it is 13.5 by 2.8 arcminutes in size . ngc 891 was discovered by the brother-and-sister team of william and caroline herschel in august 1783 . this galaxy is at an approximate distance of 30 million light-years from earth , calculated from its redshift of 0.002 . andromeda 's most celebrated open cluster is ngc 752 ( caldwell 28 ) at an overall magnitude of 5.7 . it is a loosely scattered cluster in the milky way that measures 49 arcminutes across and features approximately twelve bright stars , although more than 60 stars of approximately 9th magnitude become visible at low magnifications in a telescope . it is considered to be one of the more inconspicuous open clusters . the other open cluster in andromeda is ngc 7686 , which has a similar magnitude of 5.6 and is also a part of the milky way . it contains approximately 20 stars in a diameter of 15 arcminutes , making it a tighter cluster than ngc 752 . there is one prominent planetary nebula in andromeda : ngc 7662 ( caldwell 22 ) . lying approximately three degrees southwest of iota andromedae at a distance of about 4,000 light-years from earth , the '' blue snowball nebula '' is a popular target for amateur astronomers . it earned its popular name because it appears as a faint , round , blue-green object in a telescope , with an overall magnitude of 9.2 . upon further magnification , it is visible as a slightly elliptical annular disk that gets darker towards the center , with a magnitude 13.2 central star . the nebula has an overall magnitude of 9.2 and is 20 by 130 arcseconds in size . meteor showers . each november , the andromedids meteor shower appears to radiate from andromeda . the shower peaks in mid-to-late november every year , but has a low peak rate of fewer than two meteors per hour . astronomers have often associated the andromedids with biela 's comet , which was destroyed in the 19th century , but that connection is disputed . andromedid meteors are known for being very slow and the shower itself is considered to be diffuse , as meteors can be seen coming from nearby constellations as well as from andromeda itself . andromedid meteors sometimes appear as red fireballs . the andromedids were associated with the most spectacular meteor showers of the 19th century ; the storms of 1872 and 1885 were estimated to have a peak rate of two meteors per second ( a zenithal hourly rate of 10,000 ) , prompting one chinese astronomer to compare the meteors to falling rain . the andromedids had another outburst on december 3–5 , 2011 , the most active shower since 1885 , with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of 50 meteors per hour . the 2011 outburst was linked to ejecta from comet biela , which passed close to the sun in 1649 . none of the meteoroids observed were associated with material from the comet 's 1846 disintegration . the observers of the 2011 outburst predicted outbursts in 2018 , 2023 , and 2036 . see also . andromeda galaxy