Sarvastivada

name . sarvāstivāda is a sanskrit term that can be glossed as : '' the theory of all exists '' . the sarvāstivāda argued that all dharmas exist in the past , present and future , the '' three times '' . vasubandhu 's abhidharmakośakārikā states , '' he who affirms the existence of the dharmas of the three time periods past , present and future is held to be a sarvāstivādin . '' although there is some dispute over how the word '' sarvāstivāda '' is to be analyzed , the general consensus is that it is to be parsed into three parts : sarva '' all '' or '' every '' + asti '' exist '' + vada '' speak '' , '' say '' or '' theory '' . this equates perfectly with the chinese term , shuōyīqièyǒu bù , taisho 27 , n1545 which is literally '' the sect that speaks of the existence of everything , '' as used by xuanzang and other translators . the sarvāstivāda was also known by other names , particularly hetuvada and yuktivada . hetuvada comes from hetu – 'cause ' , which indicates their emphasis on causation and conditionality . yuktivada comes from yukti – 'reason ' or even 'logic ' , which shows their use of rational argument and syllogism . origination and history . early history . according to charles prebish , '' there is a great deal of mystery surrounding the rise and early development of the sarvāstivādin school . '' buddhism : a modern perspective . charles s . prebish . penn state press : 1975 . pg 42-43 according to dhammajoti , '' its presence , as well as that of its rival — the vibhajyavāda lineage — in the time of emperor aśoka is beyond doubt . since aśoka ’ s reign is around 268–232 b.c.e . , this means that at least by the middle of the 3rd century b.c.e . , it had already developed into a distinct school . '' dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 55 . in central asia , several buddhist monastic groups were historically prevalent . according to some accounts , the sarvāstivādins emerged from the sthavira nikāya , a small group of conservatives , who split from the reformist majority mahāsāṃghikas at the second buddhist council . according to this account , they were expelled from magadha , and moved to northwestern india where they developed into the sarvāstivādin school . a number of scholars have identified three distinct major phases of missionary activity seen in the history of buddhism in central asia , which are associated with respectively the dharmaguptaka , sarvāstivāda , and the mūlasarvāstivāda , willemen , charles . dessein , bart . cox , collett . sarvāstivāda buddhist scholasticism . 1997 . p . 126 and the origins of the sarvāstivāda have also been related to ashoka sending majjhantika ( sanskrit : madhyāntika ) on a mission to gandhara , which had an early presence of the sarvāstivāda . the sarvāstivādins in turn are believed to have given rise to the mulasarvastivada sect , although the relationship between these two groups has not yet been fully determined . according to prebish , '' this episode corresponds well with one sarvāstivādin tradition stating that madhyantika converted the city of kasmir , which seems to have close ties with gandhara . '' a third tradition says that a community of sarvāstivādin monks was established at mathura by the patriarch upagupta . in the sarvāstivādin tradition upagupta is said to have been the fifth patriarch after mahākaśyapa , ānanda , madhyāntika , and śāṇakavāsin , and in the ch'an tradition he is regarded as the fourth . kushan era . the sarvāstivāda enjoyed the patronage of kanishka ( c . 127–150 ce ) emperor of the kushan empire , during which time they were greatly strengthened , and became one of the dominant sects of buddhism in north india for centuries , flourishing throughout northwest india , north india , and central asia . when the sarvāstivāda school held a synod in kashmir during the reign of kanishka ii ( c . 158-176 ) , the most important sarvāstivāda abhidharma text , the astagrantha of katyayaniputra was rewritten and revised in sanskrit . this revised text was now known as jnanaprasthana ( '' course of knowledge '' ) . though the gandharan astagrantha had many vibhaṣas ( commentaries ) , the new kashmiri jñānaprasthāna had a sanskrit mahavibhasa , compiled by the kashmir sarvāstivāda synod . westerhoff , 2018 , p . 61 . the jñānaprasthāna and its mahāvibhaṣa , were then declared to be the new orthodoxy by kashmiris , who called themselves vaibhāṣikas . this new vaibhāṣika orthodoxy , however , was not readily accepted by all sarvāstivādins . some '' western masters '' from gandhara and bactria had divergent views which disagreed with the new kashmiri orthodoxy . these disagreements can be seen in post-mahāvibhaṣa works , such as the tattvasiddhi ( 成實論 ) , the abhidharmahṛdaya ( t no . 1550 ) and its commentaries ( t no . 1551 , no . 1552 ) , the abhidharmakośakārikā of vasubandhu and its commentaries ( who critiqued some orthodox views ) , and the nyāyānusāra ( ny ) of master saṃghabhadra ( ca fifth century ce ) who formulated the most robust vaibhāṣika response to the new criticisms . dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 57 . . tarim basin . when the chinese pilgrim xuanzang visited kucha in 630 ce , he received the favours of suvarna-deva , the son and successor of suvarna-puspa , and hinayana king of kucha . xuanzang described in many details the characteristics of kucha , and probably visited the kizil caves . of the religion of the people of kucha , he says that they were sarvastivadas and writes : , also available in : . sub-schools . sarvāstivāda was a widespread group , and there were different sub-schools or sects throughout its history , the most influential ones being the vaibhāṣika and the sautrāntika schools . vaibhāṣika . the vaibhāṣika was formed by adherents of the mahavibhasa ( mvś ) during the council of kashmir . since then , it comprised the orthodox or mainstream branch of the sarvāstivāda school based in kāśmīra ( though not exclusive to this region ) . the vaibhāśika-sarvāstivāda , which had by far the most '' comprehensive edifice of doctrinal systematics '' of the early buddhist schools , '' one does not find anywhere else a body of doctrine as organized or as complete as theirs '' . '' indeed , no other competing schools have ever come close to building up such a comprehensive edifice of doctrinal systematics as the vaibhāśika . '' the sautrantika theory of seeds ( bija ) revisited : with special reference to the ideological continuity between vasubandhu 's theory of seeds and its srilata/darstantika precedents by park , changhwan , phd thesis , university of california , berkeley , 2007 pg 2 was widely influential in india and beyond . a study of the abhidharmahṛdaya : the historical development of the concept of karma in the sarvāstivāda thought . phd thesis by wataru s . ryose . university of wisconsin-madison : 1987 pg 3 as noted by kl dhammajoti , '' it is important to realize that not all of them necessarily subscribed to each and every view sanctioned by the mvś compilers . moreover , the evolving nature of the vaibhāṣika views must be recognized as well . '' dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 76 . the vaibhāśika-sarvāstivādins are sometimes referred to in the mvś as '' the ābhidharmikas '' , '' the sarvāstivāda theoreticians '' and '' the masters of kāśmīra . '' dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 73 . in various texts , they also referred to their tradition as yuktavāda ( the doctrine of logic ) , as well as hetuvāda ( the doctrine of causes ) . dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , pp . 56 , 164 . the vaibhāṣika school saw itself as the orthodox sarvāstivāda tradition , and they were united in their doctrinal defense of the theory of '' all exists '' ( sarvām asti ) . this is the doctrine which held that dharmas , past present and future , all exist . this doctrine has been described as an eternalist theory of time . kalupahana , david ; a history of buddhist philosophy , continuities and discontinuities , page 128 . while the vaibhāṣikas held that dharmas of the three times all exist , they held that only present dharmas have '' efficacy '' ( karitra ) , thus they were able to explain how the present seems to function differently than the past or future . westerhoff , 2018 , p . 63 . among the different sarvāstivāda thinkers , there were different ideas on how this theory was to be understood . poussin ; pruden , abhidharmakosabhasyam of vasubandhu , vol 3 , 1991 , p . 808 . these differences were accepted as long as they did not contradict the doctrine of '' all exists '' and can be seen in the mvś , which outlines the four different interpretations of this doctrine by the ‘ four great ābhidharmikas of the sarvāstivāda ’ : dharmatrāta , buddhadeva , vasumitra and ghoṣaka . dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 75 . the doctrines of sarvāstivāda were not confined to 'all exists ' , but also include the theory of momentariness ( ksanika ) , conjoining ( samprayukta ) and causal simultaneity ( sahabhu ) , conditionality ( hetu and pratyaya ) , a unique presentation of the spiritual path ( marga ) , and others . these doctrines are all inter-connected and it is the principle of 'all exists ' that is the axial doctrine holding the larger movement together when the precise details of other doctrines are at stake . in order to explain how it is possible for a dharma to remain the same and yet also undergo change as it moves through the three times , the vaibhāṣika held that dharmas have a constant essence ( svabhava ) which persists through the three times . westerhoff , 2018 , p . 70 . the term was also identified as a unique mark or own characteristic ( svalaksana ) that differentiated a dharma and remained unchangeable throughout its existence . according to vaibhāṣikas , svabhavas are those things that exist substantially ( dravyasat ) as opposed to those things which are made up of aggregations of dharmas and thus only have a nominal existence ( prajñaptisat ) . . dārṣṭāntikas and sautrāntikas . the sautrāntika ( '' those who uphold the sūtras '' ) , also known as dārṣṭāntikas ( who may or may not have been a separate but related group ) , did not uphold the mahavibhasa , but rather emphasized the buddhist sūtras as being authoritative . westerhoff , jan , the golden age of indian buddhist philosophy , oxford university press , 2018 , p . 73 . already by the time of the mvś , the early dārṣṭāntikas such as dharmatrāta and buddhadeva , existed as a school of thought within the fold of the sarvāstivāda who disagreed with the orthodox views . dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 74 . these groups were also called '' the western masters '' ( pāścātya ) , the foreign masters ( bahirdeśaka ; also called ‘ the masters outside kaśmīra ’ , and the ‘ gāndhārian masters ’ ) . dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 75 . they studied the same abhidharma texts as other sarvāstivādins , but in a more critical way . according to kl dhammajoti , they eventually came to repudiate the sarvāstivāda doctrine of '' all exists . '' dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 77 . it is this group , i.e . those who rejected the most important sarvāstivāda doctrine ( along with numerous other key vaibhāṣika views ) , which came to be called sautrāntika ( those who rely on sutras ) . willemen , charles ; dessein , bart ; cox , collett ( 1998 ) . sarvāstivāda buddhist scholasticism , p . 109 . handbuch der orientalistik . zweite abteilung . indien . the sautrāntikas did not reject abhidharma however , in fact they were the authors of several abhidharma manuals , like the abhidharmahṛdaya . the most important sautrāntika was vasubandhu ( ca.350-430 ) , a native from peshawar in gandhara . he is famous for his abhidharmakośa , a very influential abhidharma work , with an auto commentary that defends sautrāntika views . he famously later converted to the yogacara school of mahayana , a tradition that itself developed out of the sarvāstivāda abhidharma . vasubandhu 's kośa led to a vigorous reaction from his contemporary , the brilliant vaibhāṣika master saṃghabhadra , who is said to have spent 12 years composing the nyāyānusāra ( a commentary to vasubandhu 's verses ) to refute vasubandhu and other sautrāntikas such as sthavira śrīlāta and his pupil rāma . dhammajoti ( 2009 ) , p . 110 . the kośa was so influential that it became the abhidharma text par excellence in both east asian buddhism and indo-tibetan buddhism . even today , it remains the main text for the study of abhidharma in these traditions . the later buddhist tradition of pramāṇa founded by dignāga and dharmakīrti is also associated with the sautrāntika school . mūlasarvāstivādins . there is much uncertainty as to the relationship of the mūlasarvāstivāda ( meaning root or original sarvāstivāda ) school and the others . they were certainly influential in spreading their mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya , as it remains the monastic rule used in indo-tibetan buddhism today . also , they seem to have been influential in indonesia by the 7th century , as noted by yijing . coedes , george . the indianized states of south-east asia . 1968 . p . 84 a number of theories have been posited by academics as to how the two are related including : frauwallner holds that mūlasarvāstivāda was the community of mathura , which was an independent group from the sarvāstivādins of kaśmir . according to bhikkhu sujato , this theory has '' stood the test of time . '' lamotte thought that the mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya was a late compilation from kaśmīr . warder suggests that the mūlasarvāstivādins was a late group who compiled a vinaya and the saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna sūtra . enomoto holds that the sarvāstivādin and mūlasarvāstivādin were the same . willemen , dessein , and cox hold that this group is really the sautrāntika school who renamed themselves in the later years of the sarvāstivāda school history . texts . vinaya . the dharmaguptaka are known to have rejected the authority of the sarvāstivāda pratimokṣa rules on the grounds that the original teachings of the buddha had been lost . baruah , bibhuti . buddhist sects and sectarianism . 2008 . p . 52 the complete sarvāstivāda vinaya is extant in the chinese buddhist canon . in its early history , the sarvāstivāda vinaya was the most common vinaya tradition in china . however , chinese buddhism later settled on the dharmaguptaka vinaya . in the 7th century , yijing wrote that in eastern china , most people followed the dharmaguptaka vinaya , while the mahāsāṃghika vinaya was used in earlier times in guanzhong ( the region around chang'an ) , and that the sarvāstivāda vinaya was prominent in the yangzi river area and further south . mohr , thea . tsedroen , jampa . dignity and discipline : reviving full ordination for buddhist nuns . 2010 . p . 187 in the 7th century , the existence of multiple vinaya lineages throughout china was criticized by prominent vinaya masters such as yijing and dao'an ( 654 & ndash ; 717 ) . in the early 8th century , daoan gained the support of emperor zhongzong of tang , and an imperial edict was issued that the saṃgha in china should use only the dharmaguptaka vinaya for ordination . heirman , ann . bumbacher , stephan peter . the spread of buddhism . 2007 . pp . 194-195 . āgamas . scholars at present have '' a nearly complete collection of sūtras from the sarvāstivāda school '' thanks to a recent discovery in afghanistan of roughly two-thirds of the dīrgha āgama in sanskrit . the madhyama āgama ( t26 , chinese trans . gotama saṅghadeva ) and saṃyukta āgama ( t99 , chinese trans . guṇabhadra ) have long been available in chinese translation . the sarvāstivāda is therefore the only early school besides the theravada for which we have a roughly complete sutra collection , although unlike the theravada it has not all been preserved in the original language . abhidharma . during the first century , the sarvāstivāda abhidharma primarily consisted of the abhidharmahrdaya authored by dharmashresthin , a native from tokharistan , and the ashtagrantha authored/compiled by katyayaniputra . both texts were translated by samghadeva in 391 ad and in 183 ad . respectively , but they were not completed until 390 in southern china . the sarvāstivāda abhidharma consists of seven texts : jnanaprasthana ( '' foundation of knowledge '' ) ( t . 1543-1544 ) prakaranapada ( '' exposition '' ) ( t . 1541-1542 ) vijnanakaya ( '' body of consciousness '' ) ( t . 1539 ) dharmaskandha ( '' aggregation of dharmas '' ) ( t . 1537 ) prajnaptisastra ( '' treatise on designations '' ) ( t . 1538 ) dhatukaya ( '' body of elements '' ) ( t . 1540 ) sangitiparyaya ( '' discourses on gathering together '' ) ( t . 1536 ) following these , are the texts that became the authority of the vaibhāṣika : mahavibhasa ( '' great commentary '' on the jñānaprasthāna ) ( t . 1545 ) all of these works have been translated into chinese , and are now part of the chinese buddhist canon . in the chinese context , the word abhidharma refers to the sarvāstivāda abhidharma , although at a minimum the dharmaguptaka , pudgalavada and theravada also had abhidharmas . later abhidharma manuals . various other abhidharma works were written by sarvāstivāda masters , some are more concise manuals of abhidharma , others critiqued the orthodox vaibhāṣika views or provided a defense of the orthodoxy . dhammajoti provides the following list of such later abhidharma works that are extant in chinese : 108 109 abhidharmāmṛta ( -rasa ) -śāstra ( t no . 1553 ) , by ghoṣaka , 2 fasc . , translator unknown . 2 . abhidharmahṛdaya ( t no . 1550 ) by dharmaśrī , 4 fasc . , tr . by saṅghadeva et . al . 3 . abhidharmahṛdaya-sūtra ( ? t no . 1551 ) by upaśānta , 2 fasc . , tr . by narendrayaśas . abhidharmahṛdayavyākhyā ( ? t no . 1552 ) , by dharmatrāta , 11 fasc . , tr . by sanghabhūti . abhidharmakośa-mūla-kārikā ( t no . 1560 ) by vasubandhu , 1 fasc . , tr . by xuan zang . 6 . abhidharmakośabhāṣyam ( t no . 1558 ) by vasubandhu , 1 fasc . , tr . by xuan zang ; ( there is also an earlier translation by paramārtha : t no . 1559 ) . abhidharmakośaśāstra-tattvārthā-ṭīkā ( t no . 1561 ) by sthiramati , 2 fasc . , translator unknown . abhidharma-nyāyānusāra ( t no . 1562 ) by saṃghabhadra , 40 fasc . , tr . by xuan zang . abhidharma-samayapradīpikā ( t no . 1563 ) by saṃghabhadra , 40 fasc . , tr . by xuan zang . abhidharmāvatāra ( t no . 1554 ) by skandhila , 2 fasc . , tr . by xuan zang . appearance and language . appearance . between 148 and 170 ce , the parthian monk an shigao came to china and translated a work which described the color of monastic robes ( skt . kāṣāya ) utitized in five major indian buddhist sects , called da biqiu sanqian weiyi ( 大比丘三千威儀 ) . hino , shoun . three mountains and seven rivers . 2004 . p . 55 another text translated at a later date , the śāriputraparipṛcchā , contains a very similar passage with nearly the same information . in the earlier source , the sarvāstivāda are described as wearing dark red robes , while the dharmaguptas are described as wearing black robes . hino , shoun . three mountains and seven rivers . 2004 . pp . 55-56 however , in the corresponding passage found in the later śāriputraparipṛcchā , the sarvāstivāda are described as wearing black robes and the dharmaguptas as wearing dark red robes . in traditions of tibetan buddhism , which follow the mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya , red robes are regarded as characteristic of their tradition . mohr , thea . tsedroen , jampa . dignity and discipline : reviving full ordination for buddhist nuns . 2010 . p . 266 . language . during the first century bce , in the gandharan cultural area ( consisting of oddiyana , gandhara and bactria , tokharistan , across the khyber pass ) , the sthaviriyas used the gāndhārī language to write their literature using the kharosthi . the tibetan historian buton rinchen drub wrote that the mahāsāṃghikas used prākrit , the sarvāstivādins used sanskrit , the sthavira nikāya used paiśācī , and the saṃmitīya used apabhraṃśa . influence . the sarvāstivādins of kāśmīra held the as authoritative , and thus were given the moniker of being vaibhāṣikas . the is thought to have been authored around 150 ce , around the time of kaniṣka ( 127–151 ce ) of the kushan empire . potter , karl . abhidharma buddhism to 150 a.d . 1998 . p . 112 this massive treatise of abhidharma ( 200 fascicles in chinese ) contains a great deal of material with what appear to be strong affinities to mahāyāna doctrines . potter , karl . abhidharma buddhism to 150 a.d . 1998 . p . 117 the is also said to illustrate the accommodations reached between the hinayana and mahāyāna traditions , as well as the means by which mahāyāna doctrines would become accepted . potter , karl . abhidharma buddhism to 150 a.d . 1998 . p . 111 the also defines the mahayana sutras and the role in their buddhist canon . here they are described as vaipulya doctrines , with '' vaipulya '' being a commonly used synonym for mahāyāna . the reads : according to a number of scholars , mahāyāna buddhism flourished during the time of the kuṣāṇa empire , and this is illustrated in the form of mahāyāna influence on the mahāvibhāṣā śāstra . willemen , charles . dessein , bart . cox , collett . sarvāstivāda buddhist scholasticism . 1997 . p . 123 the mañjuśrīmūlakalpa also records that kaniṣka presided over the establishment of prajnaparamita doctrines in the northwest of india . ray , reginald . buddhist saints in india : a study in buddhist values and orientations . 1999 . p . 410 étienne lamotte has also pointed out that a sarvāstivāda master is known to have stated that the mahāyāna prajñā sūtras were to be found amongst their vaipulya sūtras . according to paul williams , the similarly massive mahāprajñāpāramitāupadeśa also has a clear association with the vaibhāṣika sarvāstivādins . williams , paul , and tribe , anthony . buddhist thought : a complete introduction to the indian tradition . 2000 . p . 100 the vaibhāṣika and sautrāntika subschools are both classified in the tibetan tenets system as the two tenets of the hinayana , ignoring other early indian buddhist schools , which were not known to the tibetans . sarvāstivādin meditation teachers also worked on the dhyāna sutras , a group of early buddhist meditation texts which were translated into chinese and became influential in the development of chinese buddhist meditation methods . references . sources . . further reading . for a critical examination of the sarvāstivādin interpretation of the samyuktagama , see david kalupahana , causality : the central philosophy of buddhism . for a sautrantika refutation of the sarvāstivādin use of the samyuktagama , see theodore stcherbatsky , the central conception of buddhism and the meaning of the word dharma . theodore stcherbatsky , the central conception of buddhism and the meaning of the word dharma . asian educational services , 2003 , page 76 . this is a reprint of a much earlier work and the analysis is now quite dated ; the first appendix however contains translations of polemical materials .