Pantyhose

terminology . the term '' pantyhose '' originated in the united states and refers to the combination of panties ( an american english term ) with sheer nylon hosiery . in british english , these garments are called '' sheer tights '' . the term tights alone refers to all such garments regardless of whether they are sheer lingerie or sturdy outerwear . in american english , the term '' tights '' typically refers to pantyhose-like garments made from thicker material , which are generally opaque or slightly translucent . opaque leg wear made of material such as spandex are often worn by both sexes for athletic activities or as utility clothing , and are usually referred to as '' leggings '' , a term that includes casual wear . the primary difference between tights and leggings is that leggings can be worn as outerwear , whereas tights are not . in most cases , leggings will have a seam on the inside of the leg , whereas the legs of tights will be seamless . history . the history of pantyhose , as for stockings , is tied to that of changes in styles of women 's hemlines . before the 1920s , it was generally expected that women would cover their legs in public , including their ankles ; and dress and skirt hemlines were generally to the ground . the main exceptions were in sports and entertainment , making tights a more suitable choice . in cases of high cut legs or vpl provoking fabrics on stage costumes making it a practical necessity to wear them as the only lower undergarment . in the 1920s , fashionable hemlines for women began to rise , exposing the legs to just below the knees . stockings also came into vogue to maintain leg coverage , as well as some level of warmth . the most popular stockings were sheer hosiery which were first made of silk or rayon ( then known as '' artificial silk '' ) , and after 1940 of nylon , which had been invented by dupont in 1938 . during the 1940s and 1950s , stage and film producers would sew stockings to the briefs of their actresses and dancers , as testified to by singer-actress-dancer ann miller . these garments were seen in popular motion pictures such as daddy long legs . in 1953 , allen gant , sr . , of glen raven , inc . developed a commercial equivalent to these hose that he named '' panti-legs '' , but these were not brought to the open market until about 1959 . during this time , ernest g . rice invented his own design for pantyhose similar to those worn today , and in 1956 he submitted a patent titled '' combination stockings and panty '' . this design was adopted by other makers , and this caused disputes in u.s . courts for many years before the patent was upheld some time after rice 's own death . up until this time , there was little reason for women outside show business to wear '' panty hose '' , as the longer hemlines allowed for the use of over-the-knee stockings secured with a garter belt . nonetheless , during the 1960s , improved textile manufacturing processes made pantyhose increasingly more affordable , while man-made textiles such as spandex ( or elastane ) made them more comfortable and durable . the advent of the fashionable miniskirt , which exposed the legs to well above the knee , made pantyhose a necessity to many women . in 1970 , u.s . sales of pantyhose exceeded stockings for the first time , and it has remained so ever since . pantyhose became a wardrobe staple throughout the 1970s and 1980s . from 1995 a steady decline began , leveling off in 2006 with u.s . sales less than half of what they had once been . this decline has been attributed to bare legs in fashion , changes in workplace dress code , and the increased popularity of trousers . while sales of traditional styles did not recover , the 2000s saw the rise of other specific styles . fishnet hose , patterns and colors , opaque tights , low-rise pantyhose , footless shapewear , and pantyhose for men ( playfully referred to as '' mantyhose '' ) all experienced increased sales . in the 2010s , an increasing popularity for form-fitting opaque leggings paired with casual dress ( and even some officewear ) supplanted the fashion role previously held by pantyhose , although pantyhose remain popular as pair of formalwear . . composition . pantyhose generally have a standard construction : the top of the waist is a strong elastic ; the part covering the hips and the buttocks ( the panty area ) is composed of a thicker material than for the legs . the gusset or crotch covering the genitalia is a stronger material , sometimes made of porous cotton , but the legs of the pantyhose are made of the thinnest usable fabrics , and it has a consistent construction down to the wearer 's toes . these can be reinforced to guard against wear and tear . most pantyhose are composed of nylon and a mixture of spandex , which provides the elasticity and form-fitting that is characteristic of modern pantyhose . the nylon fabric is somewhat prone to tearing ( '' running '' ) , and it is common for very sheer hose to '' run '' soon after snagging on anything that is rough or sharp . variations in pantyhose construction exist , such as with fishnet pantyhose . pantyhose may be composed of other materials such as silk , cotton , cashmere or wool . styles . pantyhose are available in a wide range of styles . the sheerness of the garment , expressed as a numerical '' denier '' /'dtex '' , ranges from 3 ( extremely rare , very thin , barely visible ) up to 20 ( standard sheer ) , 30 ( semi opaque ) up to 250 ( opaque ) . control-top pantyhose , intended to boost a slimmer figure , has a reinforced-panty section . the panty section may be visible when wearing short skirts or shorts . sheer-to-waist pantyhose is sheer throughout , with the panty portion being the same thickness and color as the leg portion , and are designed for use with high-slit gowns , miniskirts , hot pants , or lingerie . often sheer-to-waist pantyhose will be reinforced along and on either side of the seam in the middle of the panty . often sheer-to-waist pantyhose comes with sandal toes - invisibly reinforced toes part . open-crotch pantyhose , sometimes known as crotchless pantyhose , do not have a gusset . instead , an opening is in place for hygiene or sexual-fetishism activities . some pantyhose have single- or double-panel gussets incorporated into them . in single-panel , there are two seams instead of the usual one , with a single seam on the opposite side ; with double-panel gussets , there are two seams on either side . concerns . the disadvantages of pantyhose includes : unlike cotton , nylon is not an absorbent material . as a result , perspiration is more likely to remain in contact with the feet , legs and genital area , thereby encouraging bacterial growth and associated odor . some hosiery products contain silver to help prevent odor and sweating of the feet , thus making the wearing of hosiery a more pleasant experience . wearing natural fiber silk stockings and tights is another means of reducing perspiration . some women do not wear pantyhose for environmental reasons , noting that they usually can not be recycled , and nylon pantyhose are not biodegradable . disposing of the item contributes to overuse of landfill . burning nylon pantyhose sometimes releases toxins into the atmosphere . this used to be the case but in the uk , local authorities accept clean , dry textiles along with other recyclables . this is both at recycling centres and curb-side collections . textiles ( including tights , pantyhose and stockings ) which can not be re-worn are recycled and turned into things like roofing felt . there are several internet sites which explain ways of reusing pantyhose ( laddered or otherwise ) . in the us , nylon stockings , tights , and pantyhose can be sent to recycled crafts to be used in craft projects like pet toys , rugs , placemats , and table runners . swedish stockings , maker of hosiery , has a program to grind down old pantyhose for use in oil and grease traps . in the past , hosiery manufacturer no nonsense had a recycling program , and so did matter of trust pantyhose have been criticized for being flimsy because the thin knit fabric is prone to tearing or laddering ( or '' running '' ) . the wearer can cause a run in the hose by catching a toenail in the fabric when the hose is put on , by catching it on a rough surface like a corner of a desk , or a car , and by numerous other risks . some women apply clear nail polish or hair spray to their hose to prevent runs from growing . some of brands offer '' ladder-resist '' pantyhose which are more durable than regular ones . pantyhose for men . while usually considered to be a woman 's garment , pantyhose can also be worn by men , for example for thermal protection , therapeutic relief or simply as a lifestyle choice . race horse jockeys may wear pantyhose under their uniform to enable them to glide freely over the legs and waist when the jockey 's body moves at a rapid pace . some fishermen who surf fish from tropical beaches may wear pantyhose for protection from jellyfish whose stingers are triggered by contact with a chemical on bare skin . in the late 1990s , several manufacturers introduced pantyhose styles designed for men to cater to this niche market . . gallery . file : mantyhose.jpg a man wearing mantyhose ( pantyhose designed specifically for men ) file : girl sitting in chair ( tone ) . jpg girl wearing pantyhose and a polkadot dress file : pantyhose run.jpg example of a '' run '' or '' ladder '' . see also . pantyhose fetishism . references . external links . how it 's made : pantyhose youtube video hosiery glossary - specialistic glossary in english