Joliet Correctional Center

history . joliet correctional center , which was a completely separate prison from stateville correctional center in nearby crest hill , opened in 1858 . the prison was built with convict labor leased by the state to contractor lorenzo p . sanger and warden samuel k . casey . the limestone used to build the prison was quarry on the site . history of will county , illinois ( chicago , 1878 ) , pp . 711–14 the first 33 inmates arrived from alton in may 1858 to begin construction ; the last prisoners were transferred in july 1860 . both criminals and prisoners of war were confined there during the civil war . the first corrections officer to be killed there was joseph clark in 1865 . by 1872 the population had reached 1,239 , a record number for a single prison . from the 1870s the prison had work contracts with local businesses . the penitentiary 's original plans included a one-hundred cell '' female cell house '' located inside the male penitentiary . female prisoners were housed adjacent to men 's cells from 1859 until 1870 , when they were moved to the fourth floor of the central administration building . in 1896 a separate , one-hundred cellblock '' joliet women 's prison '' was built across the street from the male penitentiary . in design it was an exact mini-replica of the male prison . in 1933 all female prisoners were moved to the oakdale women 's reformatory ( later known as dwight correctional center ) and the facility was used for male prisoners . l . mara dodge , '' whores and thieves of the worst kind '' : a study of women , crime , and prisons , 1835-2000 '' ( dekalb , il : northern illinois university press , 2002 ) has 4 chapters on the history of the joliet women ' prison and the experience of female prisoners and staff . the prison was slow to modernize . there was no running water or toilets in the cells in 1910 . the construction of the nearby stateville correctional center began in 1917 and opened in march 1925 was meant to lead to the swift closure of joliet . this did not happen , and both prisons operated simultaneously for the rest of the 20th century . in 1924 , leopold and loeb were given life sentences to be served at joliet ( after their successful defense—from the death penalty—by clarence darrow ) . their case was known as '' the crime of the century '' at the time after kidnapping and murdering bobby franks . in 1933 lester joseph gillis ( baby face nelson ) was released from joliet prison , and a mock-up of the foyer is shown in the 1957 movie , '' baby face nelson '' where gillis ( played by mickey rooney ) is seen both entering and leaving the facility with a suitcase in his hand . the name of the prison can be seen in his exit sequence . from at least the early 1960s , the prison included a reception and classification center for northern illinois , holding new prisoners for less than a month before their final assignments and processing over 20,000 a year . in addition to the prisoners temporarily held in the r & c unit , joliet maintained a large population of permanent inmates . in 1975 , members of the almighty black p . stone nation and other chicago street gangs took over a cell block and held several corrections officers hostage . the warden at the time , fred l . finkbeiner , spoke to the inmates through a bullhorn and promised they would not be harmed . their primary grievance was the fact that they were being transferred to other prisons because they had too much control over other inmates at joliet . one former gang member , herbert '' cadillac '' catlett , had reformed and been cooperating with the administration to bring about positive change . he tried to reason with the rioting inmates and was murdered . warden finkbeiner was standing in catlett 's blood as he spoke to the inmates , and the hostage situation was resolved . the warden later eulogized catlett at an african-american church in chicago heights . the number of inmates peaked at 1,300 in 1990 and was still 1,156 in 2000 , although capacity had been raised to 1,300 over 1999–2000 , from 1,180 previously . in 2000 there were 541 staff . closure . joliet correctional center closed as a holding prison in 2002 . budget cuts and the obsolete and dangerous nature of the buildings were the cited reasons . all inmates and most staff were transferred to stateville correctional center . the joliet area historical museum is running tours of the penitentiary for route 66 travelers and other interested parties . different tours are being offered : historic , photographer/tripod friendly and paranormal . on may 30 , 2017 , one of the buildings ( the mattress factory ) in joliet correctional center was heavily damaged by fire , the cause of which was later determined to be arson . this is the third building to be severely damaged or destroyed by fire at the facility . . media . poetry . joliet is referred to in edgar lee masters 's poem '' silas dement '' , part of the spoon river anthology : : when i came back from joliet : there was a new court house with a dome . : for i was punished like all who destroy : the past for the sake of the future . fiction . in the commitment arc of the adventure zone one of the characters suggests '' going to joliet '' . mentioned in kerouac 's on the road : '' to get out of the impossible complexities of chicago traffic i took a bus to joliet , illinois , went by the joliet pen , stationed myself just outside town after a walk through its leafy rickety streets behind , and pointed my way . '' . music . memphis minnie recorded the song '' joliet bound '' with kansas joe mccoy in 1932 , which was most likely derived from the same source as noah lee 's '' viola lee blues '' . perhaps the most well-known version of the tune was by rory block on when a woman gets the blues . bob dylan 's '' percy 's song '' tells the story of the singer 's attempt to have a friend 's ninety-nine year sentence in joliet prison commuted . the song , an outtake from the sessions that produced dylan 's album the times they are a-changin ' , has been covered by fairport convention and arlo guthrie . the henningsens wrote and recorded the song '' gun '' , which mentions joliet – '' i 'm singing solo in my cell in joliet '' . folk singer steve goodman recorded the song '' lincoln park pirates '' concerning an auto towing company of chicago . the song includes the lyrics '' our drivers are friendly and courteous/ their good manners you always will get/ 'cause they all are recent graduates/ of the charm school in joliet '' . television and film . joliet prison was featured in the 1980 john landis film the blues brothers both as a filming location and as the namesake for '' joliet '' jake blues ( john belushi ) . some characters from saw ii were ex-joliet prison inmates . 1949 -- white heat ( exteriors ) 1966 – get smart , season 2 episode 14 ( '' the whole tooth and . '' ) . as part of a mission , secret agent maxwell smart ( don adams ) deliberately gets himself arrested and sent to the prison so he can make contact with an inmate there . 1973 – charley varrick , when tom ( from tom 's gun shop ) asks where he is supposed to know al dutcher from , charley ( walter matthau ) replies , '' from joliet . he was doing a 10-year slide for murder two . his girlfriend . armenian girl . '' 1980 – the blues brothers , in the opening of the 1980 movie : elwood blues ( dan aykroyd ) is seen picking up jake blues ( john belushi ) upon his release from joliet prison . 1981 – thief , james caan 's character tells tuesday weld 's that he spent eleven years in joliet . 1986 - running scared , it is mentioned crime boss julio gonzales was released from joliet . 1988 – red heat , a 1988 film which starred arnold schwarzenegger and james belushi 1994 – saturday night live , a skit concerning prison life with chris farley and martin lawrence . 1999 – the columbia tristar show early edition , season 3 episode 13 ( '' the last untouchable '' ) . fictional mobster antonio birelli played by ernest borgnine is released from the prison . since its closure , joliet prison has been used much more as a set for various film and television projects . 2005 – derailed , a 2005 film which starred clive owen and jennifer aniston 2005–06 – the fox network shot the first season of its show prison break on location in the old facility . this prison was known as fox river state penitentiary on the show 2006 – let 's go to prison , a 2006 film which starred dax shepard and will arnett . 2007 – the fox network show bones , season 2 episode 12 ( '' the man in the cell '' ) . the prison where serial killer howard epps was held was known as 'bay view federal penitentiary ' on the show 2009 – warehouse 13 : season 1 , episode 9 – a prison , a new warden , and a charismatic preacher inmate who may have an artifact that seems related to a string of prisoner suicides accompanied by hallucinations . pete and myka search for the artifact as an approaching tropical storm accentuates its influence , but get caught up in the mayhem . 2011 – breakout kings on a & e featured t-bag from prison break escaping from fox river , again . 2015 – briefly featured in flash season 2 '' family of rogues '' as iron heights prison . 2017 – features in season 1 episode 9 of netflix 's mindhunter as the prison holding serial killer richard speck . 2019 – old joliet prison was featured as a haunted location in an episode of ghost adventures titled '' serial killer spirits : john gacy prison '' . the joliet prison collection of photographs by inmates is maintained at jolietprison.com . see also . list of illinois state prisons fox river state penitentiary . references . external links . '' joliet correctional center '' illinois department of corrections ( archive ) joliet prison at google maps information on joliet prison at the bottom of the page . tour the abandoned grounds of the old joliet correctional center in a matterport 3d virtual reality tour . cell block wing : solitary confinement : hospital : machine shop : laundry room : boiler room : powerhouse : comment : this does n't seem relevant , and needs cleaned up if any part of it gets added . -- >