Battle of Malakoff

background . until 1784 most of the fortifications around sevastopol were dedicated to the protection of the harbour entrance , the city itself and its naval base and were positioned close to these features . the construction of fortifications in the surrounding hills had been planned as early as 1837 , but at the time of the battle only basic facilities and roadways had been completed on the north side of the long , westward-facing bay . to the south the central anchor of the defence system was the malakoff-kurgan ridge . situated about southeast of the city , it consisted of a two-story stone tower of limestone on which the russians had placed five heavy 18-pounder cannons at the beginning of the siege . there is some mystery surrounding this tower . although it is known that the tower was built some time before the start of the war , the historical records do not show exactly when this occurred , and no mention of this is made in the contemporary descriptions of the siege itself . additionally , there are different spellings and translations into or from russian , including малахова башня . what is known is that the tower was originally built or expanded by sevastopol merchants and then later taken over by the russian navy . the tower had a diameter of about and a height of . in its centre the battery known as '' lunette kamchatka '' was placed . this was a smaller fortification that was designed to protect several artillery pieces . at this time the russian cartographers marked all landmarks in and around this ridge as '' fort malakoff '' . this included several large grave mounds and the same ridge lying in front known as mamelon ( '' vert mamelon '' ) . the name '' fortmortal malakoff '' ( or french '' fort malakoff '' , russian '' malakhov '' ) was retained after the war in western literature covering the crimean war . the harbour of sevastopol , formed by the estuary of the chernaya , was protected against attack by sea not only by the russian war-vessels , afloat and sunken , but also by heavy granite forts on the south side and by the defensive works . for the town itself and the karabelnaya suburb the plans for the works had been laid down for years . the malakoff tower covered the suburb , flanked on either side by the redan and the little redan . the town was covered by a line of works marked by a flagstaff and central bastions , and separated from the redan by the inner harbour . lieutenant colonel eduard totleben , the russian chief engineer , had begun work on these sites early in the war . through daily efforts to rebuild , re-arm and improve the fortifications , he was able to finally connect them with a continuous defence system enceinte . yet early in october 1854 , sevastopol was not the towering fortress it later became , and totleben himself maintained that had the allies assaulted it immediately , they would have succeeded in taking the city . there were , however , many reasons against them doing so at the time , and it was not until 17 october that the first attack took place . . battle . throughout 17 october , a tremendous artillery duel raged . the russian artillery was initially successful , the french corps fell under siege and suffered heavy losses . the advancing fleet engaging the harbour batteries also suffered a loss of 500 men and several ships were heavily damaged . still , british siege batteries managed to silence the malakoff and its annexes , after having succeeded in hitting a munitions depot and , if failure had not occurred at the other points of attack , an assault might have succeeded . as it was , by daybreak , totleben 's engineers had repaired and improved the damaged works . for months the siege of sevastopol continued . during july the russians lost on an average of 250 men a day , and finally the russians decided to break the stalemate and gradual attrition of their army . gorchakov and the field army were to make another attack at the chernaya , the first since the inkerman . on 16 august , both pavel liprandi and read 's corps furiously attacked the 37,000 french and sardinian troops on the heights above traktir bridge . the assailants came on with the greatest determination , but they were ultimately unsuccessful . at the end of the day , the russians drew off leaving 260 officers and 8,000 men dead or dying on the field ; the french and british only lost 1,700 . with this defeat the last chance of saving sevastopol vanished . the same day , a determined bombardment once more reduced the malakoff and its dependencies to impotence , and it was with absolute confidence in the result that aimable pélissier planned the final assault . at noon on 8 september 1855 , the whole of bosquet 's corps suddenly attacked all along the right sector . the fighting was of the most desperate kind : the french attack on the malakoff was successful , but the other two french attacks were repelled . the battle of the great redan was initially successful , but a russian counterattack drove the british out of the bastion after two hours after the french attacks on the flagstaff bastion ( left of the great redan ) were repelled . with the failure of the french attacks in the left sector but with the fall of the malakoff in french hands further attacks were cancelled . the russian positions around the city were no longer tenable . throughout the day the bombardment mowed down the massed russian soldiers along the whole line . the fall of the malakoff was the end of the siege of the city . that night the russians fled over the bridges to the north side , and on 9 september the victors took possession of the empty and burning city . the losses in the last assault had been very heavy : for the allies over 10,000 men , for the russians 13,000 . at least nineteen generals had fallen on the final day and with the capture of sevastopol the war was decided . no serious operations were undertaken against gorchakov who , with the field army and the remnants of the garrison , held the heights at mackenzie 's farm . but kinburn was attacked by sea and , from the naval point of view , became the first instance of the employment of ironclad warships . an armistice was agreed upon on 26 february and the treaty of paris was signed on 30 march 1856 . . order of battle , 8 september 1855 . right to left extracted from french right sector ( french 2nd corps under gdd bosquet ) little redan : 3rd division ( gdd dulac ) - 17th chasseurs , 10th , 57th , 61st and 85th line , with 2nd brigade , 2nd division of the reserve corps ( gdb jonquière ) attached - 15th and 95th line , and the chasseurs of the guard also attached curtain wall between malakoff and little redan : 4th division ( gdd la motte rouge ) - 4th chasseurs , 49th , 86th , 91st and 100th line , with imperial guard infantry brigade ( gdb uhrich ) attached - 1st and 2nd guard grenadiers ( 1 bn each ) and 1st and 2nd guard voltigeurs ( 1 bn each ) malakoff : 1st division ( gdd macmahon ) - 1st chasseurs ; 7th , 20th , and 27th line , and 1st zouaves , with 1st brigade , 2nd division ( gdb wimpffen ) attached - tirailleurs algerien , 3rd zouaves and 50th line , and the guard zouaves ( two battalions under colonel jannin ) also attached british sector ( see battle of the great redan ) french left sector ( french 1st corps under gdd la salles ) bastion du mat ( flagstaff bastion ) : 1st division ( gdd d'autemarre ) - 5th chasseurs , 19th , 26th , 39th and 74th line , with cialdini 's sardinian brigade attached central bastion : 2nd division ( gdd levaillant ) - 9th chasseurs , 21st , 42nd , 46th and 80th line , with 3rd division ( gdd paté ) - 6th chasseurs , 28th and 98th line , and 1st and 2nd foreign legion , and 4th division ( gdd lefevre ) - 10th chasseurs , 14th , 18th , 43rd and 79th line in reserve covering the left flank - 30th and 35th line ( detached from other commands ) . aftermath . at first sight russia would seem to be almost invulnerable to a sea power , and no first success , however crushing , could have humbled nicholas i . indeed , the mere capture of sevastopol would not have been strategically decisive . however , as the tsar had decided to defend it at all costs and with unlimited resources , it became an unpleasant defeat , especially as the allies had reached victory with limited resources . during the nearly one-year siege of sevastopol in the crimean war , the fortifications on the malakhov were hotly contested as they overlooked the whole city and the inner harbour . after the success of the french troops under the command of marshal pelissier , later the duke of malakoff ( french : duc de malakoff ) , and general patrice de mac-mahon , the russian defenders evacuated the entire city on 8 september 1855 , bringing a climax to the war . as the fortress enabled the control of the black sea port of sevastopol , the russian forces destroyed all of their equipment and withdrew , leaving russia with no more military fortifications on the black sea . the long-awaited russian domination of the inland sea to obtain free passage through the bosporus to the mediterranean ( and beyond ) was now not possible . in terms of logistics , the british and french had a significant advantage over the russians as they were able to receive supplies from the sea , while the russians had to bring supplies over the underdeveloped and dangerous desert tracks of southern russia . the russians lost many men and horses in bringing supplies to sevastopol . the hasty nature , too , of the fortifications , which were damaged every day during the siege by the fire of a thousand guns , and had to be rebuilt every night , required large , unprotected working parties and the losses amongst these were correspondingly heavy . these losses exhausted russia 's resources and when they were forced to employ large bodies of militia in the battle of the chernaya , it was obvious that the end was at hand . the short stories of leo tolstoy , who was present at the siege , give a graphic picture of the war from the russian point of view , portraying the miseries of the desert march , the still greater miseries of life in the casemates , and the almost daily ordeal of manning the lines , under shell-fire , against an assault which might or might not come . among the seven surviving defenders of a stone tower on the malakov kurgan , which were found by french troops among the dead , was the seriously wounded vasily kolchak , the father of aleksandr kolchak . kolchak would later become the head of all the counter-revolutionary anti-communism white forces during the russian civil war . as a result of press coverage of the siege of the tower , malakhov kurgan became a household name in europe and many large and expensive towers in western europe were named after it . among these were a number of stone mining towers in the ruhrgebiet , the so-called caponier fort malakoff in mainz , and the yellow sandstone malakoff tower in the city of luxembourg . in addition , the malakoff cake was named after the duke of malakoff , as was a cheese dish in parts of switzerland . in france , the battle was officially commemorated in a rare way : apart from the battle of magenta ( in the italian campaign ) , it was the only one of emperor napoleon iii 's exploits to result in the awarding of a victory title ( both of ducal rank ) ; this distinction was bestowed upon marshal pélissier . a malakoff was also named after this battle , as well as the avenue de malakoff . malakhov kurgan , where it was fought , now contains the eternal fire , commemorating the siege of sevastopol during world war ii . a branch of franz roubaud 's great panorama representing the battle of 1855 is also located there . references .