Stokke

general information . name . the municipality ( originally the parish ) is named after the old stokke farm ( old norse : stokkar ) , since the first church was built here . the name is the plural form of stokkr which means '' log '' . ( this is probably referring to some hills/ridges near the churchsite . ) schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . page 148 . . coat-of-arms . the coat of arms is from modern times . they were granted on 13 january 1984 . the arms are canting since stokker means '' sticks '' or '' logs '' . the arms show three gold-colored tree trunks on a red background . larsen , erlend ( 2016 ) . tre kommuner blir til én : suksesskriteriene bak nye sandefjord . e-forl . page 158 . . history . 16,000 artifacts have been recorded at brunstad in stokke , mostly tools out of flint but also roughly sixty hearths . the first recorded grave from mesolithic times is also found here and dated to 5900 bce . gaute , r . , fredrikke , d . , sara , g . , and almut schülke ( 2019 ) . brunstad i stokke , vestfold - et bosettingsområde fra rundt 6000 f.kr . , med spor etter gjentatte besøk , grav og deponeringer . viking ( 2019 ) . page 33 . retrieved on november 2 , 2020 , from . municipal history . the municipality of stokke was established on 1 january 1838 ( see formannskapsdistrikt ) . two islands were later transferred from the municipality of stokke to the neighboring municipality of nøtterøy : håøya , ( in 1901 ) and veierland ( in 1964 ) . relatively few stokke residents read sandefjords blad , the main newspaper of sandefjord , and few residents reside or work in sandefjord proper . the wealthiness of sandefjord , however , was often used as an argument for the merge with sandefjord . its international airport torp was also seen as a deciding factor for stokke ’ s decision to merge into sandefjord . for the village of vear , on the other hand , a majority of residents preferred a merge into neighboring tønsberg . consequentially , the village was transferred into tønsberg on 1 january 2017 , the day stokke joined sandefjord . larsen , erlend ( 2016 ) . tre kommuner blir til én : suksesskriteriene bak nye sandefjord . e-forl . page 72 . vear is home to 2,500 residents as of 2016 , which made up 22 percent of stokke ’ s total population prior to the merge . larsen , erlend ( 2016 ) . tre kommuner blir til én : suksesskriteriene bak nye sandefjord . e-forl . pages 164-165 . . sundås fort . remains of a fort , sundåsbatteriet , can be found across the tønsberg fjord from håøya island . the fortifications were constructed in the late 19th century during turbulent times with sweden during the union between sweden and norway . it was part of the newly established norwegian coastal artillery ( '' kystartilleriet '' ) . the fort was erected to keep potential enemies from entering tønsberg by sea , and was also meant to protect the marine harbor in melsomvik village . work on the fort began in 1897 , and the forts at both håøya island and sundåsen were completed in 1899 . trenches , commando posts , fencing , concrete gun pits , and other remains from the fort can still be seen at sundås . the fort lies by the tønsberg fjord with surrounding views of færder lighthouse and islands such as håøya , tjøme , veierland , and nøtterøy . the canons were demolished by german forces in 1942 during the german occupation of norway . the norwegian armed forces remained in control of the fort from 1945 until 1962 , when it became public property . . geography . stokke municipality had a total area of 118 & nbsp ; km 2 and had a 14 & nbsp ; km coastline along the tønsbergfjord . stokke is a town and a former municipality located within the municipality of sandefjord in vestfold county . the town of stokke is located in-between the cities of tønsberg and sandefjord . however , stokke is primarily a rural community and far smaller than its neighboring cities . it consists of a variety of recreation areas , including the storås area , which includes lakes , rivers , historic sites , and an abundance of plant- and wildlife species . another recreational site is located at bogen , which also includes a beach and an art gallery . other coastal communities include the villages of vear , melsomvik , and storevar . bertelsen , hans kristian ( 1998 ) . bli kjent med vestfold / become acquainted with vestfold . stavanger offset as . pages 114-115 . islands include langøya , ravnø , gåsø , gåsøkalven , verjø , tryteknatten , and others . lakes include akersvannet , gjennestadvannet , kulerødvannet , fossnesdammen , and others . the former municipality bordered andebu and kodal in the west , sandefjord in the south , the tønsbergfjord in the east , and tønsberg and ramnes in the north . both the railway line vestfold line and the highway european route e18 pass through the former municipality . its highest point was høgståsen at 175.6 meters . the village of stokke is home to a nature preserve known as bokemoa , a birch forest located on raet . the dense forest creates shade and a habitat for mushrooms ; over 100 species of mushrooms have been recorded in bokemoa , including species only found in birch tree forests . gjerseth , simen ( 2016 ) . nye sandefjord . liv forlag . page 84 . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . page 152 . . nature preserves . nature preserves in stokke include the island of langø , bokemoa , melsomvik plant and wildlife preserve as well as the lakes robergvannet and akersvannet . langø island lies in the tønsberg fjord and is a car-free island consisting of meadows , knolls , salt meadows , small bays , and forests . it became a landscape conservation area in 2006 . it is known for its wide variety of rare wildflowers including species such as sea thrift , alternate-leaved golden-saxifrage , cowslip , greater yellow-rattle , sticky catchfly , and many others . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . pages 148-151 . . demographics . the annual population growth is twice as high as vestfold county as a whole , and the expected life expectancy is higher than the county median . 13 percent of stokke ’ s population were first- or second-generation immigrants as of 2014 . larsen , erlend ( 2016 ) . tre kommuner blir til én : suksesskriteriene bak nye sandefjord . e-forl . page 79 . . transportation . european route e18 intersects the former municipality . vestfoldbanen operates a railway station in the town of stokke , stokke station , and sandefjord airport torp is located on the former border to sandefjord . recreation . hiking trails can be found at trælsodden , løke , høgåsen , grorudvannet , feen , furulund , ramsum , and borgeskogen . coastal hiking paths make up a total of 14 & nbsp ; km in former municipality . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . page 347 . coastal hiking trails can be found in melsomvik and also a trail connecting storevar and rakkevik . a 3 & nbsp ; km forest hike can be found at løke , which is a popular forest for collecting mushrooms . a mountain trail is located by høgåsen , the highest point in the former municipality with an elevation of 172 meters . the peak can be reached from two trails : from langevann in re or from grorudvannet in stokke . the shortest hike is from grorudvannet . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . pages 122-124 and 243 . trælsodden by the tønsberg fjord is home to several burial mounds as well as fortifications dated to world war ii . sandy beaches , diving boards and hiking trails can also be found at trælsodden . at trælsodden are graves dated to the iron age . at the time , sea levels were 4–5 meters higher than today , and the graves were consequentially placed near the shoreline . a popular fishing site is located between trælsodden and brunstad . the trail goes by the municipal beach at brunstad , immediately south of oslofjord convention center . during summers , convenience stores and seafood restaurants are open at brunstad . from brunstad , the coastal path heads inwards and passes through the himalayapark , a park offering tree climbing . the trail passes by a home built by singer jahn teigen , known as '' teigen 's pyramid '' . the trail reaches a beach before entering the boat harbor in rakkevik . it is a 3.5 & nbsp ; km hike from storevar to melsomvik , and a similar distance between melsomvik and brunstad . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . pages 358-362 . . points of interest . stokke bygdetun , oldest village museum in vestfold county , established in 1978 . gjerseth , simen ( 2016 ) . nye sandefjord . liv forlag . page 84 . sundås fort , 1899 fortifications constructed during the union between sweden and norway . gjerseth , simen ( 2016 ) . nye sandefjord . liv forlag . page 43 . trælsodden , beach and remains from fortifications and burial mounds . brunstad beach oslofjord convention center stokke station , railway station operated by vestfoldbanen bokemoa , birch tree forest and nature preserve on raet bogen , beach and hiking trails storevar , small coastal village stokke church , brick church by architect jacob wilhelm nordan from 1886 . . references . external links . municipal fact sheet from statistics norway nl : stokke ( plaats )