Deliberative democracy

overview . deliberative democracy holds that , for a democratic decision to be legitimate , it must be preceded by authentic deliberation , not merely the aggregation of preferences that occurs in voting . authentic deliberation is deliberation among decision-makers that is free from distortions of unequal political power , such as power a decision-maker obtained through economic wealth or the support of interest groups . simon . “ a blueprint for democratic law-making : give citizen juries the final say . ” social policy , summer , 1998 , pp 5-9 if the decision-makers can not reach consensus after authentically deliberating on a proposal , then they vote on the proposal using a form of majority rule . the roots of deliberative democracy can be traced back to aristotle and his notion of politics ; however , the german philosopher jürgen habermas ' work on communicative rationality and the public sphere is often identified as a major work in this area . for a brief overview of the roots and different streams of deliberative democracy , see ercan , s.a . ( 2014 ) 'deliberative democracy ' , in : d . phillips ( ed . ) , encyclopedia of educational theory and philosophy . thousand oaks , ca : sage publications , pp.214-216 deliberative democracy can be practiced by decision-makers in both representative democracy and direct democracy . elster offers a summary of the various common definitions that academics use for the term . in elitist deliberative democracy , principles of deliberative democracy apply to elite societal decision-making bodies , such as legislatures and courts ; in populist deliberative democracy , principles of deliberative democracy apply to groups of lay citizens who are empowered to make decisions . one purpose of populist deliberative democracy can be to use deliberation among a group of lay citizens to distill a more authentic public opinion about societal issues but not directly create binding law ; devices such as the deliberative opinion poll have been designed to achieve this goal . another purpose of populist deliberative democracy can be to serve as a form of direct democracy , where deliberation among a group of lay citizens forms a '' public will '' and directly creates binding law . threlkeld , simon . “ a blueprint for democratic law-making : give citizen juries the final say . ” social policy , summer , 1998 , pp 5-9 . if political decisions are made by deliberation but not by the people themselves or their elected representatives , then there is no democratic element ; this deliberative process is called elite deliberation . according to fishkin , this process attempts to indirectly filter the mass public opinion because representatives are better equipped with the knowledge of the common good than ordinary citizens . . characteristics . fishkin 's model of deliberation . james fishkin , who has designed practical implementations of deliberative democracy for over 15 years in various countries , describes five characteristics essential for legitimate deliberation : : information : the extent to which participants are given access to reasonably accurate information that they believe to be relevant to the issue : substantive balance : the extent to which arguments offered by one side or from one perspective are answered by considerations offered by those who hold other perspectives : diversity : the extent to which the major position in the public are represented by participants in the discussion : conscientiousness : the extent to which participants sincerely weigh the merits of the arguments : equal consideration : the extent to which arguments offered by all participants are considered on the merits regardless of which participants offer them in fishkin 's definition of deliberative democracy , lay citizens must participate in the decision-making process , thus making it a subtype of direct democracy . james fishkin and robert luskin suggest that deliberative discussion should be : fishkin , j . s . , & luskin , r . c . ( 2005 ) . experimenting with a democratic ideal : deliberative polling and public opinion . acta politica , 40 ( 3 ) , 284–298 . informed ( and thus informative ) . arguments should be supported by appropriate and reasonably accurate factual claims . balanced . arguments should be met by contrary arguments . conscientious . the participants should be willing to talk and listen , with civility and respect . substantive . arguments should be considered sincerely on their merits , not on how they are made or by who is making them . comprehensive . all points of view held by significant portions of the population should receive attention . cohen 's outline . joshua cohen , a student of john rawls , outlined conditions that he thinks constitute the root principles of the theory of deliberative democracy , in the article '' deliberation and democratic legitimacy '' in the 1989 book the good polity . he outlines five main features of deliberative democracy , which include : an ongoing independent association with expected continuation . the citizens in the democracy structure their institutions such that deliberation is the deciding factor in the creation of the institutions and the institutions allow deliberation to continue . a commitment to the respect of a pluralism of values and aims within the polity . the citizens consider deliberative procedure as the source of legitimacy , and prefer the causal history of legitimation for each law to be transparent and easily traceable to the deliberative process . each member recognizes and respects other members ' deliberative capacity . this can be construed as the idea that in the legislative process , we '' owe '' one another reasons for our proposals . cohen presents deliberative democracy as more than a theory of legitimacy , and forms a body of substantive rights around it based on achieving '' ideal deliberation '' : it is free in two ways : the participants consider themselves bound solely by the results and preconditions of the deliberation . they are free from any authority of prior norms or requirements . the participants suppose that they can act on the decision made ; the deliberative process is a sufficient reason to comply with the decision reached . parties to deliberation are required to state reasons for their proposals , and proposals are accepted or rejected based on the reasons given , as the content of the very deliberation taking place . participants are equal in two ways : formal : anyone can put forth proposals , criticize , and support measures . there is no substantive hierarchy . substantive : the participants are not limited or bound by certain distributions of power , resources , or pre-existing norms . '' the participants…do not regard themselves as bound by the existing system of rights , except insofar as that system establishes the framework of free deliberation among equals . '' deliberation aims at a rationally motivated consensus : it aims to find reasons acceptable to all who are committed to such a system of decision-making . when consensus or something near enough is not possible , majority rule is used . in democracy and liberty , an essay published in 1998 , cohen reiterated many of these points , also emphasizing the concept of '' reasonable pluralism '' – the acceptance of different , incompatible worldviews and the importance of good faith deliberative efforts to ensure that as far as possible the holders of these views can live together on terms acceptable to all . . gutmann and thompson 's model . amy gutmann and dennis f . thompson 's definition captures the elements that are found in most conceptions of deliberative democracy . they define it as '' a form of government in which free and equal citizens and their representatives justify decisions in a process in which they give one another reasons that are mutually acceptable and generally accessible , with the aim of reaching decisions that are binding on all at present but open to challenge in the future '' . gutmann , amy , and dennis thompson ( 2004 ) . why deliberative democracy ? pp . 3-7 . they state that deliberative democracy has four requirements , which refer to the kind of reasons that citizens and their representatives are expected to give to one another : reciprocal . the reasons should be acceptable to free and equal persons seeking fair terms of cooperation . accessible . the reasons must be given in public and the content must be understandable to the relevant audience . binding . the reason-giving process leads to a decision or law that is enforced for some period of time . the participants do not deliberate just for the sake of deliberation or for individual enlightenment . dynamic or provisional . the participants must keep open the possibility of changing their minds , and continuing a reason-giving dialogue that can challenge previous decisions and laws . strengths and weaknesses . a claimed strength of deliberative democratic models is that they are more easily able to incorporate science opinion and base policy on outputs of ongoing research , because : time is given for all participants to understand and discuss the science scientific peer review , adversarial presentation of competing arguments , refereed journals , even betting markets , are also deliberative processes . the technology used to record dissent and document opinions opposed to the majority is also useful to notarize bets , predictions and claims . deliberative ideals often include '' face-to-face discussion , the implementation of good public pol- icy , decisionmaking competence , and critical mass . '' according to proponents such as james fearon , another strength of deliberative democratic models is that they tend , more than any other model , to generate ideal conditions of impartiality , rationality and knowledge of the relevant facts . the more these conditions are fulfilled , the greater the likelihood that the decisions reached are ethics . deliberative democracy takes on the role of an '' epistemic democracy '' in this way , as it thus has an epistemic value : it allows participants to deduce what is morally correct . this view has been prominently held by carlos nino . studies by james fishkin and others have found that deliberative democracy tends to produce outcomes which are superior to those in other forms of democracy . susan c . strokes in her critical essay pathologies of deliberation ( chapter 5 of elster 1998 ) concedes there that a majority of academics interested agree with this view . deliberative democracy produces less partisanship and more sympathy with opposing views ; more respect for evidence-based reasoning rather than opinion ; a greater commitment to the decisions taken by those involved ; and a greater chance for widely shared consensus to emerge , thus promoting social cohesion between people from different backgrounds . fishkin cites extensive empirical support for the increase in public spiritedness that is often caused by participation in deliberation , and says theoretical support can be traced back to foundational democratic thinkers such as john stuart mill and alexis de tocqueville . see also chapter 5 of fishkin ( 2011 ) , which gives detailed citations to the empirical work . the specific mill work cited is considerations on representative government ( 1861 ) , and the specific tocqueville work cited is democracy in america ( 1835 ) . former diplomat carne ross writes that in 2011 that the debates arising from deliberative democracy are also much more civil , collaborative , and evidence-based than the debates in traditional town hall meetings or in internet forums . for ross , the key reason for this is that in deliberative democracy citizens are empowered by knowledge that their debates will have a measurable impact on society . efforts to promote public participation have been widely critiqued . there is particular concern regarding the potential capture of the public into the sphere of influence of governance stakeholders , leaving communities frustrated by public participation initiatives , marginalized and ignored . a claimed failure of most theories of deliberative democracy is that they do not address the problems of voting . james fishkin 's 1991 work , '' democracy and deliberation '' , introduced a way to apply the theory of deliberative democracy to real-world decision making , by way of what he calls the deliberative opinion poll . in the deliberative opinion poll , a statistically representative sample of the nation or a community is gathered to discuss an issue in conditions that further deliberation . the group is then polled , and the results of the poll and the actual deliberation can be used both as a recommending force and in certain circumstances , to replace a vote . dozens of deliberative opinion polls have been conducted across the united states since his book was published . the political philosopher charles blattberg has criticized deliberative democracy on four grounds : ( i ) the rules for deliberation that deliberative theorists affirm interfere with , rather than facilitate , good practical reasoning ; ( ii ) deliberative democracy is ideologically biased in favor of liberalism as well as republican over parliamentary democratic systems ; ( iii ) deliberative democrats assert a too-sharp division between just and rational deliberation on the one hand and self-interested and coercive bargaining or negotiation on the other ; and ( iv ) deliberative democrats encourage an adversarial relationship between state and society , one that undermines solidarity between citizens . a criticism of deliberation is that potentially it allows those most skilled in rhetoric to sway the decision in their favour . this criticism has been made since deliberative democracy first arose in ancient athens . . history . consensus-based decision making similar to deliberative democracy is characteristic of the hunter gather band society thought to predominate in pre-historical times . as some of these societies became more complex with developments like division of labour , community-based decision making was displaced by various forms of authoritarian rule . the first example of democracy arose in greece as athenian democracy during the sixth century bc . athenian democracy was both deliberative and largely direct : some decisions were made by representatives but most were made by ″the people″ directly . athenian democracy came to an end in 322bc . when democracy was revived as a political system about 2000 years later , decisions were made by representatives rather than directly by the people . in a sense , this revived version was deliberative from its beginnings ; for example , in 1774 edmund burke made a famous speech where he called great britain 's parliament a deliberative assembly . similarly , the founding fathers of the united states considered deliberation an essential part of the government they created in the late 18th century . the deliberative element of democracy was not widely studied by academics until the late 20th century . although some of the seminal work was done in the 1970s and 80s , it was only in 1990 that deliberative democracy began to attract substantial attention from political scientists . according to professor john dryzek , early work on deliberative democracy was part of efforts to develop a theory of democratic legitimacy . theorists such as carne ross advocate deliberative democracy as a complete alternative to representative democracy . the more common view , held by contributors such as james fishkin , is that direct deliberative democracy can be complementary to traditional representative democracy . since 1994 , hundreds of implementations of direct deliberative democracy have taken place throughout the world . for example , lay citizens have used deliberative democracy to determine local budget allocations in various cities and to undertake major public projects , such as the rebuilding of new orleans after hurricane katrina . . association with political movements . deliberative democracy recognizes a conflict of interest between the citizen participating , those affected or victimized by the process being undertaken , and the group-entity that organizes the decision . thus it usually involves an extensive outreach effort to include marginalized , isolated , ignored groups in decisions , and to extensively document dissent , grounds for dissent , and future predictions of consequences of actions . it focuses as much on the process as the results . in this form it is a complete theory of civics . on the other hand , many practitioners of deliberative democracy attempt to be as neutral and open-ended as possible , inviting ( or even randomly selecting ) people who represent a wide range of views and providing them with balanced materials to guide their discussions . examples include national issues forums , choices for the 21st century , study circles , deliberative opinion polls , the citizens ' assembly usa , and the 21st-century town meetings convened by americaspeaks , among others . in these cases , deliberative democracy is not connected to left-wing politics but is intended to create a conversation among people of different philosophies and beliefs . in canada , there have been two prominent applications of deliberative democratic models . in 2004 , the british columbia citizens ' assembly on electoral reform convened a policy jury to consider alternatives to the first-past-the-post electoral systems . in 2007 , the ontario citizens ' assembly on electoral reform convened to consider alternative electoral systems in that province . similarly , three of ontario 's local health integration networks ( lhin ) have referred their budget priorities to a policy jury for advice and refinement . the green party of the united states refers to its particular proposals for grassroots democracy and electoral reform by this name . although not always the case , participation in deliberation has often been found to shift participants opinions in favour of green positions , and can even cause a favourable change of voting intention . for example , with europolis 2009 , at the time one of the largest deliberative assemblies ever held , which set out to assess the public 's view on a wide range of issues and included representatives from all 27 eu member nations , the share of citizens intending to vote for the greens increased from 8 % to 18 % . . academic contributors . according to professor stephen tierney , perhaps the earliest notable example of academic interest in the deliberative aspects of democracy occurred in john rawls 1971 work a theory of justice . constitutional referendums : a theoretical enquiry ( 2009 ) by prof stephen tierney ( see esp . ft note 67 ) joseph m . bessette coined the term '' deliberative democracy '' in his 1980 work '' deliberative democracy : the majority principle in republican government '' , and went on to elaborate and defend the notion in '' the mild voice of reason '' ( 1994 ) . others contributing to the notion of deliberative democracy include carlos nino , jon elster , roberto gargarella , john gastil , jürgen habermas , david held , joshua cohen , john rawls , amy gutmann , noëlle mcafee , john dryzek , rense bos , james s . fishkin , jane mansbridge , jose luis marti , dennis thompson , benny hjern , hal koch , seyla benhabib , ethan leib , charles sabel , jeffrey k . tulis , david estlund , mariah zeisberg , jeffrey l . mcnairn , iris marion young and robert b . talisse . although political theorists took the lead in the study of deliberative democracy , political scientists have in recent years begun to investigate its processes . one of the main challenges currently is to discover more about the actual conditions under which the ideals of deliberative democracy are more or less likely to be realized . thompson , dennis f ( 2008 ) . “ deliberative democratic theory and empirical political science , ” annual review of political science 11 : 497-520 . most recently , scholarship has focused on the emergence of a ‘ systemic approach ’ to the study of deliberation . this suggests that the deliberative capacity of a democratic system needs to be understood through the interconnection of the variety of sites of deliberation which exist , rather than any single setting . owen , d . and smith , g . ( 2015 ) . '' survey article : deliberation , democracy , and the systemic turn . '' “ journal of political philosophy ” 23.2 : 213-234 . see also . organizations : americaspeaks concepts : anticipatory exclusion citizen oversight deliberation deliberative assembly deliberative opinion poll deliberative referendum mediated deliberation experiments in deliberative democracy citizens ' assembly ( ireland ) democracy agonistic democracy consensus democracy collaborative e-democracy demarchy direct democracy liquid democracy participatory democracy representative democracy group decision making consensus decision-making majority rule meritocracy online deliberation open source governance the people 's parliament citizens ' assembly public reason public sphere ralph nader 's concord principles royal commission . notes and citations . references . bessette , joseph ( 1980 ) '' deliberative democracy : the majority principle in republican government , '' in how democratic is the constitution ? , washington , d.c . , aei press . pp . & nbsp ; 102–116 . bessette , joseph , ( 1994 ) the mild voice of reason : deliberative democracy & american national government chicago : university of chicago press . blattberg , c . ( 2003 ) '' patriotic , not deliberative , democracy '' critical review of international social and political philosophy 6 , no . 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 155–74 . reprinted as ch . 2 of blattberg , c . ( 2009 ) patriotic elaborations : essays in practical philosophy . montreal and kingston : mcgill-queen 's university press . cohen , j . ( 1989 ) '' deliberative democracy and democratic legitimacy '' ( hamlin , a . and pettit , p . eds . ) , the good polity . oxford : blackwell . pp . & nbsp ; 17–34 cohen , j . ( 1997 ) '' deliberation and democratic legitimacy '' ( james bohman & william rehg eds . ) deliberative democracy : essays on reason and politics ( bohman , j . and rehg , w . eds . ) . fishkin , james & peter laslett , eds . ( 2003 ) . debating deliberative democracy . wiley-blackwell . gutmann , amy and dennis thompson ( 1996 ) . democracy and disagreement . princeton university press . gutmann , amy and dennis thompson ( 2002 ) . why deliberative democracy ? princeton university press . leibj , ethan j . '' can direct democracy be made deliberative ? '' , buffalo law review , vol . 54 , 2006 nino , c . s . ( 1996 ) the constitution of deliberative democracy . new haven : yale university press . owen , d . and smith , g . ( 2015 ) . '' survey article : deliberation , democracy , and the systemic turn . '' “ journal of political philosophy ” 23.2 : 213-234 steenhuis , quinten . ( 2004 ) '' the deliberative opinion poll : promises and challenges '' . carnegie mellon university . unpublished thesis . available online talisse , robert , ( 2004 ) democracy after liberalism publisher : routledge thompson , dennis f ( 2008 ) . “ deliberative democratic theory and empirical political science , ” annual review of political science 11 : 497-520 . tulis , jeffrey k . , ( 1988 ) the rhetorical presidency publisher : princeton university press tulis , jeffrey k . , ( 2003 ) '' deliberation between institutions , '' in debating deliberative democracy , eds . james fishkin and peter laslett . wiley-blackwell . uhr , j . ( 1998 ) deliberative democracy in australia : the changing place of parliament , cambridge : cambridge university press painter , kimberly , ( 2013 ) '' deliberative democracy in action : exploring the 2012 city of austin bond development process '' applied research project texas state university . external links . centre for deliberative democracy and global governance , university of canberra , the world leading center in the growing field of deliberative democracy openforum.com.au , an online collaborative think tank , which invites people from all walks of life to engage with the political process , by participating directly in policy debates with politicians , business people , academics , senior public servants , and other interested parties . national issues forums center for deliberative democracy , stanford university deliberative democracy consortium & mdash ; a movement to promote deliberative democracy at the national level , internationally the national coalition for dialogue and deliberation & mdash ; a hub for this growing community of practice , with hundreds of members and thousands of resources americaspeaks official website , creators of the 21st century town meeting alternative demokratie deliberative democracy in germany transl . in engl . mass lbp official website bc citizens ' assembly on electoral reform website ontario citizens ' assembly on electoral reform website closing the gap in deliberative democracy : the importance of communication in the post-deliberative process journal of public deliberation synthesizes the research , opinion , projects , experiments and experiences of academics and practitioners in the emerging multi-disciplinary field and political movement . citizens ' initiative review process in several u.s . states ( unofficial )