Heptonstall

history . the place-name 'heptonstall ' is first recorded as heptonstall in the 1274 wakefield court rolls , and in 1316 in the feudal aids . the name means '' the stall or stable in hebden '' . the name 'hebden ' means '' rose-hip dene or valley '' . eilert ekwall , the concise oxford dictionary of english place-names , pp.236 , 240 . heptonstall initially formed part of the manor of halifax-cum-heptonstall , itself subinfeudatory to the manor of wakefield , and so does not explicitly appear in early taxation records , such as those for the poll tax . in 1626 the manor was spun-off and sold and was extinguished in the late 19th century . heptonstall was the site of a battle during the early part of the english civil war in 1643 . historically a centre for hand-loom weaving , heptonstall 's cottages and terraced houses are characterised by large first-floor windows to maximise the light for weaving . lucy caffyn ( october 1983 ) world archaeology , vol . 15 , no . 2 , p 174 '' housing in an industrial landscape : a study of workers ' housing in west yorkshire '' the older churchyard claims '' king '' david hartley amongst notable graves there . hartley was founder of the cragg coiners and lived as a rogue in the calderdale area until he was hanged at tyburn near york in 1770 . the foundation stone of its octagonal methodist chapel , the oldest still in continued use , was laid following the visit of john wesley in 1764 . reader 's digest ( 1998 ) land of moors and dales reader 's digest association ltd in the mid-1980s the paving on a road through heptonstall was removed , revealing the original stone setts . although there was a plan to remove the setts , local protests convinced the council to restore them . at the same time the existing concrete street lights were replaced with late 19th-century cast-iron gas lamps . both developments acted as a traffic calming measure . community . a local park is used for sport and includes a playground for children . around heptonstall are walking and cycle routes . a small local-history museum is based in what was once the village grammar school . adjacent to heptonstall lie the national trust woodlands of hardcastle crags with walking paths and a restored 19th-century mill . half a mile out of the village is lumb bank , the first of the arvon foundation 's residential centres for writers . each year on good friday there are performances of the heptonstall version of the traditional pace egg play . these are held in weavers ' square next to the old graveyard . heptonstall festival , a free , day-long music festival , is usually held in early july also in weaver 's square . it usually begins with a fell race . the village is a day-trip destination for tourists and walkers , especially in the summer months . the two public houses are the cross and the white lion . there is a small post office – the original post office , on smithwell lane , is now a residential property . a cafe/delicatessen is situated in towngate . the village 's oldest house is stag cottage ( c.1580 ) , which is within a small courtyard called stag fold . at the back of the cottage , on the level of a public car park , is a doorway to a dungeon , once used as a lock-up . nearby there is a pinfold , built to hold livestock , but now a picnic area . church . heptonstall 's original church was dedicated to st thomas becket . it was founded c.1260 , and was altered and added to over several centuries . the church was damaged by a gale in 1847 , and is now only a shell . a new church , thomas the apostle , was built in the same churchyard . this suffered a lightning strike in 1875 . the church has good acoustics , and is used for the annual pennine spring music festival , held every spring bank holiday week . this includes workshops , masterclasses and performances . pennine spring music the old church ruin is occasionally used for open-air services . the tower of the new church contains eight bells , cast in 1912 by john taylor & co . these were removed to a bell foundry for refurbishment on 31 august 2012 and were returned , with new bearings , in october 2012 . the american poet sylvia plath , who was married to poet laureate ted hughes from nearby mytholmroyd , is buried in the graveyard extension , to the south-west of st thomas becket 's churchyard . plath 's headstone has been several times vandalised by removing hughes 's surname from the memorial , because some of her fans believe he was responsible for her death . another poet buried here is the american expatriate asa benveniste , a co-founder in london of the publisher trigram press . in the 1980s benveniste and his partner agnetha falk ran a second-hand bookshop in hebden bridge . iain sinclair , london : city of disappearances , london : hamish hamilton , 2006 . his gravestone reads : '' foolish enough to have been a poet '' . . methodist chapel . john wesley laid the foundation stone of the octagonal chapel situated off northgate , which was completed in 1764 – he recommended the shape to avoid conflict with the established church . local people attended the parish church and methodist preaching . the chapel also provided teaching in reading and writing for the poor . the chapel was originally built as a symmetrical octagon but by 1802 , with the society including 337 members and 1,002 scholars , one end of the chapel was pulled down and the side walls were extended to provide extra space . heptonstall trail , a calder civic trust publication , 1996 . media . heptonstall methodist chapel featured in the bbc four 2010 series churches : how to read them , in which richard taylor named it as one of his ten favourite churches , saying : '' if buildings have an aura , this one radiated friendship . '' the ruin of st thomas a becket church featured as a location in the 1993 bbc television drama series mr . wroe 's virgins , which was directed by danny boyle . the village was the main location used in the bbc three situation comedy the gemma factor , with the local tearoom being used for a major part of the show . it was aired in spring 2010 . heptonstall was a major location in the rochdale pioneers , a film produced by the co-operative british youth film academy , telling the story of the birth of the co-operative movement , and screened in november 2012 . heptonstall is also featured in the 2010 short film trailing dirt , directed by richard cousins and written by alison flack . the 2014 bbc drama happy valley was partly filmed in heptonstall , and featured sylvia plath 's grave . see also . eastwood , west yorkshire . references . external links . www.heptonstall.org parish web site