Shetland Sheepdog

history . alt unlike many miniature breeds that resemble their larger counterparts , this breed was not developed simply by selective breeding the rough collie for smaller and smaller size . the original sheepdog of shetland was a spitz-type dog , probably similar to the modern icelandic sheepdog . this dog was crossed with mainland working collies brought to the islands , and then after being brought to england , it was further extensively crossed with the rough collie , and other breeds including some or all of the extinct greenland dog , the king charles spaniel ( not the cavalier ) , the pomeranian , and possibly the border collie . the original spitz-type working sheepdog of shetland is now extinct , having been replaced for herding there by the border collie . shelties were used for herding until commercial livestock farming required larger breeds . when the breed was originally introduced breeders called them shetland collies , which upset rough collie breeders , so the name was changed to shetland sheepdog . during the early 20th century ( up until the 1940s ) , additional crosses were made to rough collies to help retain the desired rough collie type – in fact , the first akc sheltie champion 's dam was a purebred rough collie . the year 1909 marked the initial recognition of the sheltie by the english kennel club , with the first registered sheltie being a female called badenock rose . the first sheltie to be registered by the american kennel club was '' lord scott '' in 1911 . . description . the general appearance of the sheltie is that of a miniature rough collie . they are a small , double coated , working dog , agile and sturdy . blue merle shelties may have blue eyes or one brown and one blue eye , but all others have dark-colored eyes . their expression should be that of alertness with a gentle and sometimes reserved nature . they are often very good with children . they carry their tail down low , only lifted when alert and never carried over the back . they are an intensely loyal breed , sometimes reserved with strangers but should not be shy or showing timidness as per the akc breed standard . coat and colors . shelties have a double coat , which means that they have two layers of fur that make up their coat . the long , rough guard hairs lie on top of a thick , soft undercoat . the guard hairs are water-repellent , while the undercoat provides relief from both high and low temperatures . the english kennel club describes three different colors : '' tricolor , blue merle , and sable ( ranging from golden through mahogany ) , marked with varying amounts of white and/or tan . '' essentially , however , a blue merle dog is a genetically black dog , either black , white , and tan ( tricolor ) . in the show ring , blue merles may have blue eyes ; all other colors must have brown eyes . basic coat colors . sable & nbsp ; – sable is dominant over other colors . may be pure for sable ( two sable genes ) or may be tri-factored or bi-factored ( carrying one sable gene and one tricolor or bicolor gene ) . '' tri-factored '' sable and '' shaded '' sable are not interchangeable terms . a shaded dog ( one with a lot of black overlay on a sable coat ) may or may not be tri-factored or bi-factored . tricolor & nbsp ; – black , white , and tan . tricolor is dominant over bi-black , and may carry the factor for bicolor . bi-black & nbsp ; – black and white . bi-black is recessive . a bi-black sheltie carries two bi-black genes ; thus any dog with a bi-black parent is always bi-factored whatever its own coat color is . 'modified ' coat colors . any of the above colors may also have a color modification gene . the color modification genes are merling and white factoring . merling dilutes the base color ( sable , tricolor , or bi-black ) causing a black dog 's coat to show a mix of black , white , and grey hairs , often with black patches . blue merle—blue , white and tan . a tricolor with the merling gene . may have blue eyes . bi-blue—blue and white . a bi-black with the merling gene . may have blue eyes . sable merle—faded or mottled sable and white . often born with a mottled coat of darker brown over lighter brown , they usually present as a faded or lighter sable or can appear as a washed-out blue-merle . sable merles are shown in the breed ring as sables ; therefore , blue eyes are a major fault in akc . blue eyes are not faulted in sable merles in ukc . white factoring affects the amount of white on the dog . it is hard to tell , without actually breeding , whether a dog is white-factored or not , though dogs with white going up the stifle ( the front of the hind leg ) are usually assumed to be white-factored . breeding two white-factored dogs can result in color-headed whites — shelties with colored heads ( sable , tricolor , bi-black , or blue or sable merle ) and white bodies . for show dogs , dogs more than 50 percent white are heavily penalized and thus are not shown in the breed ring ; they are normal in every other way . double merles , a product of breeding two merle shelties together , have a very high incidence of deafness or blindness . there have been reports of a brindle sheltie but many sheltie enthusiasts agree that a cross sometime in the ancestry of that specific sheltie could have produced a brindle . unacceptable colors in the show ring are a rustiness in a blue or black coat . colors may not be faded , no conspicuous white spots , and the color can not be over 50 percent white . height and weight . shelties normally weigh around . in general , males are taller and heavier than females . accepted height ranges may differ depending on country and standard used . in the us and canada , breed standards state that males and females can be between , all other standards ( australia , new zealand and uk ) specify males : , females : except fci which specifies females : at the shoulder ( withers ) , however , some shelties can be found outside of these ranges but are not considered truly representative of the breed . variation can be found within litters , and height ( in the range of is above the breed standard in some lines . ears . to conform to the breed standards , the shelties ' ears should bend slightly or '' tip '' , this contributes to the '' proper sheltie expression '' . the ear is to have the top third to a quarter of the ear tipped . if a dog 's ears are not bent ( referred to as prick ears ) some owners brace them into the correct position for several weeks to several months . wide-set ( too much distance between ) ears are also not a desired trait , nor are ears which tip too low down ( referred to as 'hound ' ears ) . grooming . shelties have a double coat , and often shed a lot of the time , no matter the season . the topcoat consists of long , straight , water-repellent hair , which provides protection from cold and the elements . the down hair is short , furry and very dense and helps to keep the dog warm . mats can be commonly found behind the ears , under the elbow on each front leg , and in the fluffy fur on the hind legs ( the '' skirts '' ) , as well as around the collar ( if worn ) . the coat is usually shed twice a year , often in spring and autumn . females will also shed right before or right after giving birth . male shelties technically shed less than females but fur still comes off constantly . shaving these dogs is very bad for their skin and some do not regrow any significant amount of hair after being shaved , a condition known as alopecia . spaying or neutering can alter coat texture , making it softer , more prone to matting and even more profuse . shelties shed in clumps which can be pulled or brushed out of the main coat , rather than individual hair . this makes them much easier to groom and clean up after than many smooth-haired dogs , which leave loose fur in their space . temperament . thumb shelties have a high level of intelligence . according to dr . stanley coren , an expert on animal intelligence , the shetland sheepdog is one of the brightest dogs , ranking 6th out of 138 breeds tested . his research found that an average sheltie could understand a new command in fewer than five repetitions and would obey a command the first time it was given 95 % of the time or better . . health . for the most part , shelties are athletic and healthy . like the rough collie , there is a tendency toward inherited malformation and disease of the eyes . each individual puppy should have its eyes examined by a qualified veterinary ophthalmologist . some lines may be susceptible to hypothyroidism , epilepsy , hip dysplasia , or skin allergies . shetland sheepdogs have four times the risk of other dogs of developing transitional cell carcinoma , a cancer of the bladder . clinical medicine of the dog and cat , 2nd ed . , ed . michael schaer , p . 528 . dermatomyositis may occur at the age of 4 to 6 months , and is frequently misdiagnosed by general practice veterinarians as mange or demodectic mange . the disease manifests itself as alopecia on the top of the head , supra- and suborbital area and forearms as well as the tip of the tail . if the disease progresses to its more damaging form , it could affect the autonomic nervous system and the dog may have to be euthanised . this disease is genetically transmitted and recessive , with breeders having no clear methodology for screening except clear bloodline records . deep tissue biopsy are required to definitively diagnose dermatomyositis . lay assessment of end-stage dermatomyositis is observed difficulty or inability to swallow , even water . von willebrand disease is an inherited bleeding disorder . in shelties , affected dogs as a general rule are not viable and do not live long . the sheltie carries type iii of von willebrands , which is the most severe of the three levels . there are dna tests that were developed to find von willebrands in shelties . it can be done at any age , and it will give three results : affected , carrier or non-affected . although small breed dogs do not usually suffer unduly from hip dysplasia , it has been identified in shelties . hip dysplasia occurs when the head of the femur and the acetabulum do not fit together correctly , frequently causing pain or lameness . hip dysplasia is thought to be genetic . many breeders will have their dogs ' hips x-rayed and certified by the orthopedic foundation for animals . eyes . the two basic forms of inherited eye diseases/defects in shelties are collie eye anomaly ( cea ) and progressive retinal atrophy ( pra ) . collie eye anomaly : an autosomal recessive inherited trait which results in incomplete closure of the embryonic fissure ; seen almost exclusively in collies , border collies and shetland sheepdogs . '' collie . '' saunders comprehensive veterinary dictionary . philadelphia : elsevier health sciences , 2007 . credo reference . web . 17 september 2012 . cea can be detected in young puppies by a veterinary ophthalmologist . the disease involves the retina . it is always bilateral although the severity may be disparate ( unequal ) between eyes . other accompanying defects ( ophthalmic anomalies ) may wrongly indicate a more severe manifestation of cea . cea is present at birth and although it can not be cured , it does n't progress . signs of cea in shelties are small , or deepset eyes . that is , the severity of the disease at birth will not change throughout the dog 's life . cea is scored similar to the way hips are . cea is genetic , inheritance is autosomal recessive , this means that even a dog that shows no phenotypic signs of the condition may be a carrier . breeders should actively try to breed this disease out by only breeding with dogs that have '' clear '' eyes or very low scoring eyes . a cea score considered too high to breed with may still be low enough not to affect the dog 's life . these dogs live happy and healthy lives as pets but should be not used for breeding . the recent development of a dna test for cea makes control of this disease much more likely as more breeders take advantage of the test . pra can be detected at any time but usually does not show up until the dog is around two years old . breeding dogs should be tested for genotype for this condition before breeding and only animals found '' clear '' should be used for breeding . pra can occur in most breeds of dog including mix breeds . in most breeds it is also an autosomal recessive condition , however it has been found in other breeds to be autosomal dominant and sex-linked in others . as the name suggests , it is a progressive disease which will eventually result in total blindness . like cea , an affected dog should not be bred with but these dogs can live happily as pets . currently there is no treatment for either disease , but as both diseases ( cea and pra ) are hereditary it is possible to eliminate them using selective breeding . breeding . as with all dogs , shelties should be screened for inheritable genetic diseases before breeding . both male and female should be tested for thyroid problems , von willebrands disease and brucellosis , as well as have hip x-rays and eyes cleared by the relevant national authorities . breeding colours are also a problem for many beginner breeders . certain colour combinations can produce unwanted or potentially harmful results , such as mating blue merle to blue merle , which can produce what is called a '' double merle '' , more likely to suffer from deafness or blindness . mating a sable and white to a blue merle can produce a sable merle , which is undesirable for the show ring . a tri-colour to a pure-for-sable ( a sable and white which can produce only other sable and whites ) , will produce only sable and whites , but they will be tri-factored sable and whites ( which means they have the tri-gene . ) there are many more examples of breeding for colour , so a good breeder will research colour genetics prior to breeding . there are many different genes contributing to the different colours of the sheltie , including the bi gene , the merling gene , the sable gene , and the tricolour gene . . mdr1 gene mutation . according to the college of veterinary medicine at washington state university , the shetland sheepdog , and many other herding breeds , have a risk of being born with a mdr1 gene mutation , with about 15 percent of individuals affected . cross-breeds are also affected . dogs carrying mdr1-1 share a common ancestor that experienced remarkable evolutionary success , having contributed genetically to at least nine distinct breeds of dog . due to this genetic mutation , affected dogs may exhibit sensitivity or adverse reactions to many drugs , including acepromazine , butorphanol , doxorubicin , erythromycin , ivermectin , loperamide , milbemycin , moxidectin , rifampin , selamectin , vinblastine , and vincristine . . working life . as the name suggests , shelties can and have been used as sheepdogs and still participate in sheepdog trials to this day . herding dogs conduct livestock from one place to another by causing fear-flocking and flight behaviour . serpell , james , ed . the domestic dog : its evolution , behaviour and interactions with people . new york : cambridge university press , 1995 . print . the instinct to herd is primarily a product of breeding . no amount of training can substitute this trait . shelties can also be great therapy dogs for those who need comfort during hard times such as natural disasters or severe illness . this breed is rarely aggressive and tends to do well with children and being handled by them . . activities . in their size group , the breed dominates dog agility , obedience , showmanship , flyball , tracking , and herding . herding instincts and trainability can be measured at noncompetitive herding tests . shelties exhibiting basic herding instincts can be trained to compete in herding trials . . famous shetland sheepdogs . ch halstor 's peter pumpkin rom - the shetland sheepdog sire with the most champions ( 160 ) . badenock rose - the first shetland sheepdog registered with the the kennel club . mickey - main character of canadian children 's series mickey 's farm . see also . shetland animal breeds . references . external links . american shetland sheepdog association ( assa )