Caudle

etymology . the word caudle came into middle english via the old french word caudel , ultimately derived from latin caldus , '' warm '' . the 1911 encyclopædia britannica states the word derived from medieval latin caldellum , a diminutive of caldum , a warm drink , from calidus , hot . the oxford english dictionary cites the use of the word to 1297 . the word 's etymological connection to heat makes it cognate with '' cauldron '' . recipes . a related recipe for skyr , a cultured dairy product , appears in the early 13th century . the earliest surviving recipe for caudle , from 1300–1325 , is simply a list of ingredients : wine , wheat starch , raisins , and sugar to '' abate the strength of the wine '' . another recipe from the late 14th century has more ingredients and more details on the cooking procedure : mix breadcrumbs , wine , sugar or honey , and saffron , bring to a boil , then thicken with egg yolks , and sprinkle with salt , sugar , and ginger . a 15th-century english cookbook includes three caudle recipes : ale or wine is heated and thickened with egg yolks and/or ground almonds , then optionally spiced with sugar , honey , saffron , and/or ginger ( one recipe specifically says '' no salt '' ) . in a description of an initiation ceremony at merton college , oxford in 1647 , caudle is described as a '' syrupy gruel with spices and wine or ale added '' . william carew hazlitt provides a number of recipes for caudles and possets in his 1886 book , old cookery books and ancient cuisine . the 1911 encyclopædia britannica describes it as '' a drink of warm gruel , mixed with spice and wine , formerly given to women in childbed '' , i.e . as a restorative food during her postpartum confinement . emily post 's 1922 etiquette in society , in business , in politics , and at home , the classic guide to american manners , states that '' although according to cook-books caudle is a gruel , the actual '' caudle '' invariably served at christenings is a hot eggnog , drunk out of little punch cups '' ( see punch bowl ) . '' for the sick and lying-in '' . aside from the initiation ceremony mentioned above , caudle was often served to people who were seen to need strengthening , especially invalids and new mothers . a historian of georgian england says that maternity hospitals always served a '' traditional postlabor fortified caudle '' to women who had just given birth . the british lying-in hospital had '' laws , orders , and regulations '' printed to be displayed on the wards , detailing among other things , the menu . mothers on the '' low diet '' had caudle ; when they graduated to the '' common diet '' it was beer caudle ; and the '' full diet '' had no need of the invalid liquid anymore . maria rundell included a '' caudle for the sick and lying-in '' in her best-selling a new system of domestic cookery ( 1806 ) . ( '' lying-in '' is an obsolete term for childbirth , referring to the extended period of bed rest that marked the traditional recuperation time . ) judith montefiore likewise included caudle with the '' recipes for invalids '' in her the jewish manual ( 1846 ) , the first exposition of jewish cuisine in english . five years later , the english housekeeper by anne cobbett ( daughter of william cobbett ) gives variants of caudles , of either gruel ( oatmeal ) or rice , with different types of alcohol , and seasonings , including capillaire . she devotes a chapter to invalid food , making the point that '' often when the doctor 's skill has saved the life of his patient . it remains for the diligent nurse to prepare the cooling drinks and restorative foods . everything which is prepared for a sick person should be delicately clean , served quickly , in the nicest order ; and in a small quantity at a time . '' . as a metonym . as caudel was served to new mothers to build up their strength , so it was offered to their visitors , to share in the happy occasion . '' cake and caudel '' or '' taking caudle '' became metonymy for a '' lying-in visit '' , when women went to see their friends ' new babies . these were women-only space , as more than one man noted . the american playwright royall tyler has one of the female characters in the comedy of manners the contrast ( 1787 ) decline the offer of a man 's escorting her by claiming that '' half her visits are cake and caudel '' and therefore unsuitable for him . a generation later in 1821 , thomas gaspey wrote of these visits ( with the italics in the original ) : offering caudel , or cake and caudel , to all lying-in visitors is referred to as an old british custom . queen charlotte , consort of george iii , bore him 15 princes and princesses . after the christening of the youngest , princess amelia in 1783 , '' the greater part of the company then paid a visit to the nursery , where they were entertained ( as usual on such occasions ) with cake and caudel . '' this continued into queen victoria 's reign : the day after she gave birth to the prince of wales , '' many of the female nobility called at buckingham palace , and were received by lady charlemont , the lady in waiting , and after taking caudle were taken to the north wing to see the infant prince . '' but it was not just nobles who came . la belle assemblée reported that the aftermath of a royal birth was '' a usual reception of the public to cake and caudel '' . the london chronicle reported in 1765 that '' the resort of different ranks of people at st . james 's to receive the queen 's caudle is now very great . '' . implements . there was a vessel particular to the drink , a caudle cup , a traditional baby shower , '' which used to be handed round the young mother 's chamber '' , according to dr oliver wendell holmes sr . after the birth of princess augusta sophia , the sixth child of george iii and queen charlotte : . other uses . a caudle formed part of the beltane ( may day ) fire festival celebrations collated by james frazier in the golden bough . he quotes at length thomas pennant , '' who traveled in perthshire in the year 1769 '' : on the first of may , the herdsmen of every village hold their bel-tien , a rural sacrifice . they cut a square trench on the ground , leaving the turf in the middle ; on that they make a fire of wood , on which they dress a large caudle of eggs , butter , oatmeal and milk ; and bring besides the ingredients of the caudle , plenty of beer and whisky ; for each of the company must contribute something . the rites begin with spilling some of the caudle on the ground , by way of libation : on that everyone takes a cake of oatmeal , upon which are raised nine square knobs , each dedicated to some particular being , the supposed preserver of their flocks and herds , or to some particular animal , the real destroyer of them : each person then turns his face to the fire , breaks off a knob , and flinging it over his shoulders , says , 'this i give to thee , preserve thou my horses ; this to thee , preserve thou my sheep ; and so on . ' after that , they use the same ceremony to the noxious animals : 'this i give to thee , o fox ! spare thou my lambs ; this to thee , o hooded crow ! this to thee , o eagle ! ' when the ceremony is over , they dine on the caudle ; and after the feast is finished , what is left is hid by two persons deputed for that purpose ; but on the next sunday they reassemble , and finish the reliques of the first entertainment . frazier notes other scottish may day celebrations with similar dishes , '' a repast of eggs and milk in the consistence of a custard '' . apparently it was '' a custom in france to bring the bridegroom a caudle in the middle of the night on his wedding-night '' , according to an explanatory note in an 1877 edition of essays ( montaigne ) , presumably inserted by the english editor , william carew hazlitt .