Traci Lords

life and career . 1968–1983 : early life . lords was born nora louise kuzma on may 7 , 1968 , in steubenville , ohio , to louis and patricia kuzma . her father 's parents were of ukrainian descent , while her mother was of irish ancestry . louis was employed as a steelworker . kuzma has one elder sister , lorraine , and two younger sisters , rachel and grace . her parents divorced when she was seven years old and kuzma moved with her mother and three sisters to her great-grandmother 's house . following their divorce , her alcoholic , abusive father got partial custody . around that same time , her mother enrolled at ohio university and became employed part-time . when kuzma was 12 , she moved with her mother , her mother 's new boyfriend , and sisters to redondo beach , california . she did not see her father for many years after . in september 1982 , she began attending redondo union high school but dropped out at age 15 to enter the porn industry . during her early school years , kuzma developed a rebellious attitude . she was angry at her mother and found a father figure in her mother 's boyfriend . roger hayes , as she calls him in her autobiography , was a drug abuser and molested kuzma in her sleep . after her mother broke up with him due to his drug use , she began dating his friend . kuzma refused to follow them to a new place and was left with her older sister lorraine . her mother and two younger sisters eventually found a new apartment . . 1984–1986 : pornography career . at age 15 , traci lords : underneath it all kuzma became pregnant by her high school boyfriend . afraid of her mother 's reaction , she went to hayes for help . he arranged for her to have an abortion without her mother 's knowledge . looking for a job to get some money , she was introduced to his friend and started working for her as a babysitter . the woman offered to improve kuzma 's job opportunities by helping her get a fake driver 's license . she provided kuzma with a new birth certificate on condition that if she were ever caught she would say that she had stolen the phony identification . kuzma now had the alias kristie elizabeth nussman and a new driver 's license that stated she was 20 rather than 15 years old . in february 1984 , she answered a newspaper advertisement for jim south 's world modeling talent agency . posing as her stepfather , hayes drove her to the agency . after signing a contract , she began working as a nude model and appeared in magazines such as velvet , juggs , and club . during august , when she was selected to model for penthouse magazine 's september 1984 15th-anniversary issue , kuzma was asked to choose a stage name . according to a 1988 interview , she chose traci—one of the popular names she had longed for growing up—and lords , after the actor jack lord , since she was a fan of the television series hawaii five-o , in which he portrayed the character of steve mcgarrett . lords made the first of many porn movies in 1984 , when she appeared in what gets me hot ! alongside tom byron , who later became her boyfriend offscreen . jennings , david . ( 2000 ) . skinflicks : the inside story of the x-rated video industry . authorhouse . google book search . retrieved on march 14 , 2015 . she first appeared only in a non-sex role but was later replaced with a hardcore scene . in her next movie , those young girls , she appeared in a sex role alongside harry reems and ginger lynn . after appearing at age 16 with john leslie ( an actor 23 years her senior ) in the porno parody talk dirty to me part iii ( which won the avn award for the best movie ) , lords was hailed as the '' princess of porn '' . she became one of the highest-paid porn actresses of that time , earning more than 1,000 a day . besides her work in porn , she also appeared in the music video for '' gim me gim me good lovin ' '' by the heavy metal band helix . lords continued making more movies until late 1985 when she tried to quit the industry at age 17 , but returned a few months later . afterwards , she met stuart dell , who became her boyfriend , manager , and business partner . they formed the traci lords company . dell and lords made a distribution deal with sy adler , an industry veteran who ran vantage international , that they would produce three movies for the company . during march , the first tlc feature , traci takes tokyo , was released . the second , beverly hills copulator , was released afterwards , but the third movie , screamer , was shelved . '' the traci lords story '' . she : revolutionary tough girl culture . retrieved on march 14 , 2015 . during late may 1986 ( around three weeks after lords ' 18th birthday ) , authorities were informed that she had been underage when she appeared in the porn movies . she had lied ( according to lords , it was a '' white lie '' ) to law enforcement , photographers , producers , directors , co-workers , and the general public for two years . the owners of her movie agency and x-citement video , inc . were arrested ( see united states v . x-citement video , inc . ) . she was taken into protective custody and hired high-profile lawyer leslie abramson . on july 10 , district attorney 's investigators searched lords ' redondo beach home as well as the sun valley offices of vantage international productions ( a major producer of adult movies ) and the sherman oaks offices of modeling agent jim south . south and other industry officials said that lords , who was seeking employment , provided a california driver 's license , a u.s . passport , and a birth certificate , which stated that her name was kristie nussman and gave a birth date of november 17 , 1962 . leslie jay , a spokeswoman for penthouse publisher bob guccione , also said lords showed identification indicating that she was older than 18 before the illicit photos for the september 1984 issue were taken . palermo , dave . '' sex films pulled ; star allegedly too young '' , los angeles times , july 18 , 1986 . when investigators used lords ' fake birth certificate and fake state identification cards to locate the real kristie nussman , nussman said that her birth certificate had been stolen a few years earlier and that an impostor had apparently forged her name on official forms . two adults who knew lords , but who requested anonymity , said they saw her picture in the adult magazine velvet during july 1984 and telephoned the district attorney 's office to inform authorities that she was underage , but that an investigator told them , '' there is n't anything we can do about it . '' soble , ronald l . and feldman , paul . '' sex film star not facing charges , reiner says '' , los angeles times , july 19 , 1986 . murphy , kim . '' u.s . loses round in traci lords case '' , los angeles times , september 30 , 1988 . on july 17 , 1986 , video rental shops and adult movie theaters in the us scrambled to withdraw from their shelves all hardcore material featuring lords in order to avoid prosecution for distributing child pornography . john weston , attorney of the adult film association of america , said distributors should withdraw any movie made before may 1986 , featuring lords '' in sexual conduct , no matter how briefly '' . the withdrawal of lords ' movies from the market cost the industry millions of dollars . kolson , ann . '' shock : the porn queen was just 15 '' , the philadelphia inquirer , july 19 , 1986 . polman , dick . '' traci lords : fallout from a porn scandal '' , the philadelphia inquirer , july 25 , 1986 . government prosecutors declared that lords was a victim of a manipulative industry , maintaining that she was drugged and made to do non-consensual acts . murphy , kim . '' three in traci lords sex film case indicted '' , los angeles times , march 6 , 1987 . industry insiders , including ron jeremy , tom byron , peter north , and ginger lynn said they never saw her use drugs and that she was always fully aware of her actions . while most of her movies were permanently removed from distribution in the united states , several were re-edited to remove lords ' scenes entirely ( such as kinky business and new wave hookers ) , or in a few cases , had new footage filmed with a different actress playing her part ( as in talk dirty to me part iii ) . the only movie legally available in the united states was traci , i love you , filmed in cannes , france only two days after her 18th birthday . . 1987–1991 : transition to mainstream , not of this earth and cry-baby . after spending several months in therapy , lords decided to concentrate on acting . she enrolled at the lee strasberg theatre and film institute , where she studied method acting for three months . after leaving the school , lords placed an advertisement in the hollywood reporter looking for representation . she was contacted by fred westheimer and although the agency declined to officially represent her , he decided to send her out on a few auditions . as a result , she was offered a guest role in an episode of the television series wiseguy . shortly afterwards , she met the director jim wynorski , who was directing the remake of roger corman 's 1957 sci-fi classic not of this earth . he immediately cast lords into the lead role of nadine story , and not of this earth ( 1988 ) became her first mainstream film debut since her departure from the adult film industry . although the film failed at the box office , it did well in video sales . based on that success , lords was offered to appear in wynorski 's next film , the haunting of morella ( 1989 ) . however , lords turned down the offer due to the requirement of having a nude scene , since she was trying to establish herself as a serious actress . she also signed with a modeling agency under her birth name nora kuzma and appeared on two covers of joe weider 's magazine muscle & fitness . around that time , lords became a spokesperson for children of the night , an organization for runaways and abused children , and was planning to release a book titled out of the blue : the traci lords story . in november 1988 , lords enrolled in another acting class and again began looking for an agent . in december , she mass-mailed her resume to various agents and arranged a meeting with don gerler . lords auditioned for the part of breathless mahoney in the film dick tracy ( 1990 ) , but the role went to madonna . in march 1989 , john waters auditioned her for his teenage comedy musical cry-baby ( 1990 ) ; waters had referred to lords as a '' sexual terrorist . '' she won the role and appeared in the film alongside johnny depp and ricki lake . the film was a critical and commercial success , and her portrayal of the rebellious teenager wanda woodward established her as a legitimate actress . on the set of the film , she met the property master brook yeaton , whom she began dating . the couple married in september 1990 in baltimore . in june 1990 , the exercise video warm up with traci lords was released . directed and produced by her former boyfriend and business partner stewart dell , the video had been filmed in early 1988 . as lords wrote in her autobiography , she was unsatisfied with the final version of the video . an extended version was reissued in 1993 under the title traci lords : advanced jazzthetics . in 1991 , lords starred in the thriller raw nerve and the action crime film a time to die . lords appeared in such popular tv shows as roseanne , married . with children , macgyver and hercules . she continued modeling and walked the runway for fashion designers such as janet howard and thierry mugler . . 1992–1996 : breakthrough , 1000 fires and melrose place . during 1992 , lords decided to emphasize her career as a recording artist . she first got signed to a development deal with capitol records . lim , gerrie . '' traci lords : the other side of an x-rated star '' , bigo , issue 110 , february 1995 . after meeting with rodney bingenheimer at a birthday party , she was recommended to jeff jacklin , who hired her to record the song '' love never dies '' for the movie pet sematary two ( 1992 ) . the producer of the soundtrack , gary kurfirst , signed lords to his company radioactive records . she was later featured on the songs '' little baby nothing '' by manic street preachers and '' acid eaters '' by ramones . during 1993 , lords was cast in the television adaptation of stephen king 's novel the tommyknockers . swertlow , frank . '' traci lords : drug-free and mainstream '' , orlando sentinel , april 13 , 1993 . during the spring of 1994 , lords began working on her debut album . the company arranged her to fly to london and meet with producer tom bailey . after finishing her recording with bailey , lords was introduced to producer ben watkins of juno reactor with whom she recorded more techno-influenced songs . she later met mike edwards , the main singer of the band jesus jones . around the same time , lords was cast in the television series roseanne , appearing in three episodes . during january 1995 , lords appeared in four episodes of the television series melrose place , where she played the part of rikki abbott . svetkey , benjamin . '' the porn star who went legit '' . entertainment weekly , january 27 , 1995 . mccabe , bruce . '' details profiles actress-with-a-past traci lords : ' i was never a victim , ' she says '' . the baltimore sun , april 23 , 1995 . her debut studio album , 1000 fires , was released on february 28 , 1995 . it received generally positive reviews and the lead single '' control '' peaked at number two on the hot dance club songs . '' traci lords - chart history '' . billboard . retrieved january 26 , 2015 . an instrumental version of '' control '' was remixed and released on the soundtrack to mortal kombat ( 1995 ) , which was certified double platinum by the recording industry association of america ( riaa ) . the album 's second single , '' fallen angel '' , was also successful in charts , peaking at number eleven on hot dance club songs . the paul oakenfold remix of the song was included on the soundtrack of the movie virtuosity ( 1995 ) , in which lords had a cameo appearance . after the release of the album , lords embarked on a small tour performing as a dj , mostly in miami nightclubs . goyanes , ily ( july 5 , 2013 ) . '' traci lords at florida supercon : '' i love miami . i packed my bikini '' '' . miami new times . retrieved 2015-03-06 . on august 12 , 1995 , she was the opening act of the lollapalooza after-party , enit festival , alongside moby , sven väth , dj keoki and single cell orchestra . riemenschneider , chris ( august 12 , 1995 ) . '' lollapalooza fans can dance till dawn at post-concert rave '' . los angeles times . retrieved 2015-03-06 . romero , dennis ( august 16 , 1995 ) . '' pop music review : enit festival a successful mix of traditional , progressive '' . los angeles times . retrieved 2015-03-06 . by the end of 1995 , lords divorced her husband of five years , brook yeaton . fink , mitchell . '' the insider '' . people , april 3 , 1995 . in 1996 , she appeared in a commercial for guess with juliette lewis . ryon , ruth . '' selling a home she never sees '' , los angeles times , june 9 , 1996 . . 1997–2002 : profiler , blade and first wave . in 1997 , lords appeared in a small part in the gregg araki film nowhere , and starred in the drama thriller stir . she also guest starred on television series nash bridges and viper . in november , she became a recurring cast member in the second season of the crime television series profiler . she played a felon , sharon lesher , who is manipulated by a serial killer jack-of-all-trades and eventually becomes his partner in crime jill-of-all-trades . in 1998 , lords had a supporting role in the crime thriller boogie boy and starred in the drama extramarital . she also appeared in the action horror film blade ( 1998 ) in which she played the vampire seductress racquel . lords was eventually approached to appear in the sequel blade ii ( 2002 ) portraying racquel 's twin sister valerine in seeking of vengeance upon blade . however , she turned down the offer because of her contradictory schedule . at the premiere of the film , lords announced she was finishing her sophomore album on radioactive records that would be released in the spring of 1999 . however , it was later neglected after she left the record label . in august , lords ended her two-year relationship with john enos after they reportedly got into an argument because her cat was killed by one of enos ' dogs . in 2000 , lords had lead roles in the films epicenter and chump change . her role of sam in the romantic comedy chump change earned her the film discovery jury award for best actress at the the comedy festival . in september , she became a regular cast member in the third season of the syfy television series first wave , becoming the first recurring female character to be featured on the series . she played jordan radcliffe , an heiress and leader of the human resistance group '' the raven nation '' after the aliens used her brother to murder her parents . . 2003–2006 : underneath it all . her autobiography , traci lords : underneath it all , was published during july 2003 by harpercollins . in the book , lords chronicled her childhood , career , and two-year stint in the x-rated industry . the book received positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success , making the new york times best seller list . it was criticized by pornographers , who claim they were the victims . in the book , lords revealed that she received about 35,000 as total compensation for all her porno movies , including the 5,000 for her underage appearance in penthouse . lords continued to use the now-famous stage name that she had given herself as a minor and ultimately made it her legal name . she explained , '' i chose to stop running from it . instead , i won it , legally changing my name to traci elizabeth lords . that 's who i was , and that 's who i was going to be . '' in her interview with oprah winfrey she stated : '' i found you can run , but you can not hide . '' during 2003 , it was announced that lords was working on new music and had recorded a cover version of missing persons ' song '' walking in l.a . '' . directed by mike ruiz , the music video was premiered during her interview on the oprah winfrey show . on december 28 , 2004 , she independently released two songs , '' sunshine '' and '' you burn inside of me '' , via online music store cd baby . both of the songs along with '' what cha gon na do '' was featured in the television series joan of arcadia . '' you burn inside of me '' was also used in the commercial for duprey cosmetics , in which lords appeared . she signed to sea to sun records the following year , and released the chart-topping single '' last drag '' . lords is currently recording new music in los angeles . 2007–2009 : motherhood and zack and miri make a porno . by the beginning of 2007 , lords became unexpectedly pregnant . '' traci lords : motherhood was “ unexpected ” '' , celebrity baby scoop , january 23 , 2012 . world entertainment news network . '' traci lords - lords still stunned by motherhood '' , contactmusic.com , january 24 , 2012 . she first announced her pregnancy in june : '' i kind of thought the children thing was off the table . now i 'm expecting a boy ! we 're stunned and thrilled . i just want you to know , these 36-ds are mine . i have n't had a boob job , she laughed ! i am 5 months pregnant ! but now i 'm starting to show . and my husband is happy with the changes in my figure . '' smith , liz . '' sick of sharpton '' , new york post , june 17 , 2007 . archived from the original on august 28 , 2008 . '' traci lords expecting first child , a son '' , people , june 17 , 2007 . on october 7 , 2007 , at the age of 39 , she gave birth to a son , gunnar lords lee , her first child with her husband of five years , jeff lee . '' traci lords welcomes a son '' , people , october 10 , 2007 . in january 2008 , it was announced that lords had been cast in kevin smith 's comedy zack and miri make a porno ( 2008 ) . total film . '' randal makes a porno with traci lords '' , gamesradar , january 16 , 2008 . ew staff . '' kevin smith casts traci lords in 'porno ' '' , entertainment weekly , january 18 , 2008 . she said that at first she wanted to refuse but changed her mind after reading the script . '' it was really great that in taking the movie because i did n't plan on going back to work right away , but i was dying to work with kevin . i never thought it would be on something called zack and miri make a porno . what ? so i went and i read the script at his house and i was prepared to say no . i thought i have the perfect out . i just had a kid . no one is going to blame me if i say i just ca n't do this right now . but it made me laugh out loud and it made me just literally cry . it was just funny . '' topel , fred . '' traci lords on zack and miri make a porno '' , canmag , october 28 , 2008 . okstaff . '' traci lords : do n't call me a porn star ! '' , ok ! , october 31 , 2008 . initially , the character had a topless scene in the movie , but lords refused . i 'm done with all that , she said . lords chose to breastfeed her son in between takes instead . jordan , jennifer . '' traci lords refuses to go topless due to breastfeeding '' , parentdish , november 3 , 2008 . katie morgan , a pornographic actress , also appeared in the film . williamson , kevin . '' traci lords hooked by porn again '' , canoe.ca , october 31 , 2008 . in 2009 , lords appeared in the direct-to-dvd science fiction movie , princess of mars , alongside antonio sabàto jr . she was disappointed by the final project . '' somewhere in my heart of hearts , i was worried that it might be a crummy movie . the production was just too careless . but i believed the voices of those around me who said 'no , it 'll be artistic , no , it 'll be creative . you 'll look beautiful . we have a very limited budget but honest , you 'll be proud . ' they were wrong , it was very bad . at least that was what i was told . after watching the first two minutes i had to turn it off and hide under the covers . '' lords , traci . '' i did a very bad thing '' , the huffington post , september 3 , 2012 . . 2010–2014 : return to music and excision . in march 2010 , lords announced she began working on her new album with '' pretty '' being the lead single . however , the project was later shelved and '' pretty '' was released as a promotional single only . lords starred in the drama comedy au pair , kansas which premiered in april 2011 at the kansas city filmfest . in july , lords officially signed to independent record label sea to sun recordings and in october made her musical comeback with the song '' last drag '' . the single was successful in dance charts debuting at number forty-five and eventually peaking at number four on the dance club songs . lords starred alongside annalynne mccord and ariel winter in the horror film excision ( 2012 ) , which premiered in january 2012 at the sundance film festival . her portrayal of the controlling mother phyllis earned lords fangoria fangoria chainsaw awards as well as fright meter award and cineuphoria award . in september , lords released a compilation of dance music traci lords presents : m2f2 ( 2012 ) . it featured three of her own remixed tracks as well as songs by other artists . the song '' he 's my bitch '' managed to chart on the billboard dance club songs peaking at number twenty-five . lords also voiced the character of layla stockton in the 2012 video game hitman : absolution . following the steubenville high school rape case , lords spoke up on the topic and subsequently released the song '' stupidville '' as a response to the case . '' i was born in steubenville , ohio and i was raped in there . so was my mother . i think there 's a sickness in that city , '' lords said . in 2013 , lords appeared in the horror movie devil may call ( 2013 ) and an episode of the web series eastsiders . she was nominated for the best guest star – drama at the 5th indie series awards . 2015–present : fashion career and upcoming directorial debut . in may 2015 , lords appeared in an episode of the fourth season of the reality television series celebrity wife swap , where she swapped lives with jackée harry . lords co-starred in jim wynorski 's television horror sharkansas women 's prison massacre ( 2015 ) and made her second appearance as val on the series eastsiders . in march 2016 , lords co-starred in the television thriller nightmare nurse ( 2016 ) in which she played a psychopathic nurse looking for revenge for her dead husband . lords voiced several characters in the action-adventure video game hitman ( 2016 ) after having had previously voiced the character of layla stockton in hitman : absolution ( 2012 ) . in june , lords announced her collaboration with pinup girl clothing . the first pieces from her collection were inspired by the character of wanda woodward from cry-baby ( 1990 ) as well as 1950s fashion ; the clothing line is available exclusively through the pinup girl clothing website . she commented on her inspiration behind the line : '' john waters wrote such strong characters in cry-baby . and in that rockabilly , punk rock , vintage pin-up girl kind of world , wanda woodward is pretty much a queen . '' in 2016 , lords co-starred in the viaplay original comedy series swedish dicks . she played jane mckinney , a private investigator and competitor of the show 's protagonist . in october , the series was renewed for a second season with lords as a confirmed cast member . in the united states , the first season premiered in august 2017 . later that month , lords confirmed she would direct her first feature film called the unquiet grave . filming was scheduled to commence in 2017 . in november , it was announced that lords voiced the character of jackal z in the upcoming video game let it die ( 2016 ) , and will appear on the third season of eastsiders . in july 2017 , helmut lang 's fashion campaign for the fall 2017 collection featuring lords was unveiled . in may 2018 , lords released the single '' come alive '' as a gift for her fans in celebration of her 50th birthday . following the release it was announced that she began working on an ep with adam barta and jordan von haslow . in july 2018 , the second season of swedish dicks premiered in the united states . as of 2020 , lords continues to act , and has had a number of films released over the last couple of years . due to the covid-19 pandemic , the release date for her 2020 film nicole , her ex & the killer is still in limbo . activism . lords has publicly stated her support of the lgbt community . she has also done work to encourage runaways and homeless teens get off the streets such as her promos for children of the night . filmography . discography . 1000 fires ( 1995 ) . bibliography . traci lords : underneath it all ( 2003 ) . see also . golden age of porn . references . footnotes . . sources . nicolas barbano : verdens 25 hotteste pornostjerner ( rosinante , denmark 1999 ) steve rag ( tim greaves ) : norma k . nr . 1-2 and nora k . nr . 3-6 ( england 1990–1992 ) : traci lords-fanzine steve rag ( tim greaves ) : the nora k . kompendium ( media publications , england 1996 ) : the best from norma k./nora k . brad linaweaver ( pub ) : traci lords – incomparable ( mondo cult , 2009 ) suzanne somers ( ed ) : wednesday 's children : adult survivors of abuse speak out ( putnam adult , 1992 ) frank c . naylor el cine x underground . llevándolo al límite , 2009 ed . : lulu . external links .