Modesty Blaise

fictional character biography . in 1945 , a nameless girl escapes from a displaced person ( dp ) camp in kalyros , greece . she remembers nothing from her short past and wanders through post-world war ii mediterranean , the middle east , and regions of north africa , where she learns to survive the hard way . she befriends lob , another wandering refugee who is a jewish hungarian scholar from budapest . he gives her an education and a first name : modesty . some time later , modesty creates her last name after , merlin 's tutor from the king arthur . as revealed in the xanadu talisman when lob dies is unclear , other than its being prior to her going to tangier . in 'the xanadu talisman ' it is mentioned that modesty has left lob at a village to recover from a wound ; she goes alone to sell a car tyre . in 1953 she takes control of a criminal gang in tangier from henri louche and expands it into an international organization called the network . during the years that she runs the network , she meets willie garvin . despite his desperate lifestyle , she sees his potential and offers him a job . inspired by her belief in him , he pulls through as her right-hand man in the network and becomes modesty 's most trusted friend . theirs is a strictly platonic relationship , based on mutual respect and shared interests . he always calls her '' princess '' , a form of address only he is allowed to use . other members of the network call modesty '' mam'selle '' ( as in the french term '' mademoiselle '' or '' miss '' ) . though their relationship has no sexual element , modesty 's various lovers often feel jealous of garvin - as he is the only man who remains part of her life , while lovers come and go . by the same token , some of willie 's girlfriends are initially jealous of modesty , but later come to understand how the dynamic between them works ( such as in the case of lady janet ) . she obtains british nationality by marrying and divorcing an englishman in beirut ; the husband ( james turner ) dies a year later of alcoholism . having made a point of not dealing in secrets belonging to h.m . government , when she feels she has made enough money , she retires and moves to england and willie garvin follows suit . bored by their new lives among the idle rich , they accept a request for assistance from sir gerald tarrant , a high-ranking official of the british secret service . this is where the story really begins , although it is treated differently in the first comic strip and the first book . ( see note in differences between comic strip and books , below . ) modesty 's fortune is estimated at 500,000 pounds as of 1963 ( over 8.84 million pounds in 2020 ) . she lives in a penthouse in london overlooking hyde park , and also owns a villa in tangier and a cottage two miles from benildon , wiltshire . she is 5 feet 6 inches ( 168 & nbsp ; cm ) tall and weighs 120 & nbsp ; lbs ( 54 & nbsp ; kg ) as revealed in la machine . many of her adventures are based on capers in which she and willie garvin become involved as a result of their association with tarrant . however , they may also help perfect strangers or fight various eccentric villains in exotic locations of their own volition if the cause fits their values ; '' ghosts '' from their network past also emerge to haunt them from time to time . although modesty and willie will not hesitate to kill if necessary , they avoid deadly force whenever possible , often relying upon their extraordinary physical combat and weapons skills . there are many occasions in the comic strip and novels where the two decide ahead of time whether to use deadly force ( '' for keeps '' ) or less-lethal methods ( '' for sleeps '' ) depending on the level of the perceived threat . in willie and modesty 's fights there is a great emphasis on unarmed combat and unusual weapons . modesty 's weapon of choice is a '' kongo '' or yawara and as for firearms she begins by preferring the colt . 32 revolver and mab brevete . 32 acp auto pistol , although in later books she switches to carrying a star pd . 45 auto pistol . willie 's preferred weapon is the knife throwing , of which he usually carries two . many other strange weapons ( such as the quarterstaff , épée , blowgun , and sling ) and unexpected fighting techniques are also featured . in keeping with the '' floating timeline '' spirit of other long-running comic strip and literary characters , modesty and willie generally do not age over the decades , with modesty always being depicted as being in her late twenties and willie eight years older . the only exceptions to this rule occur in the comic strip origin story , '' in the beginning '' ; the 1996 short story collection cobra trap , the final modesty blaise book , which contains five stories that take place where modesty 's age moves from 20 to 52 ( approximately ) ; and the 2003 film my name is modesty , which is a prequel depicting modesty in her late teens . comic strip . having conceived the idea after a chance meeting with a girl during his wartime service in the middle east , o'donnell elected to work with jim holdaway , with whom he had worked on the strip romeo brown , after a trial period of collaboration with frank hampson , creator of dan dare , left o'donnell dissatisfied . modesty blaise debuted in the london evening standard on 13 may 1963 . the strip was syndicated among a large number of newspapers ranging from the johannesburg star to the detroit free press , the bombay samachar , the telegraph ( kolkata , india ) , the star ( malaysia ) , the west australian ( perth ) , the evening citizen ( glasgow , scotland ) and the birmingham mail ( birmingham , england ) . after jim holdaway 's sudden death in 1970 , the art of the strip was provided by the spanish artist enrique badía romero . holdaway died midway through illustrating the story the warlords of phoenix ; romero completed the illustrations . eight years later , romero quit to make time for his own comics projects , and after short attempts by john burns and patrick wright , neville colvin drew the strip until 1986 . then romero returned to the job and continued until the end of the strip . the strip 's circulation in the united states was erratic , in part because of the occasional nude scenes , which were much less acceptable in the us than elsewhere , resulting in a censored version of the strip being circulated . ( modesty occasionally used a tactic that she called the '' nailer , '' in which she appeared topless , distracting the bad guys long enough to give willie or herself a chance to incapacitate them . ) an example of this censorship appears in the introduction to the 2007 titan books reprint volume death trap , which illustrated two segments of the story arc , '' the junk men '' that were censored by the detroit free press when it published the strip in 1977 ; both versions of the frames can be seen at comicwiki.dk in both cases a screen was drawn over scantily clad images of willie and modesty . reportedly , o'donnell did not approve of the changes , although they were made by the artist , romero . lawrence blackmore , '' preserving modesty 's modesty '' in modesty blaise : death trap . titan books , 2007 , no pagination the final modesty blaise strip ran in the evening standard on 11 april 2001 . some of the newspapers that carried the series , feeling that it had become a tradition for their readers , began running it again from the beginning . o'donnell , to give romero some additional work , gave the artist permission to adapt one of his short stories ( '' cobra trap '' ) as a comic that was published in the scandinavian anthology magazine agent x9 in 2002 , later being reprinted in the us in a special issue of comics revue . from 1 december 2008 , the evening standard , which had stopped including comic strips for some time , republished la machine , using the original artwork . following a change of ownership of the paper , they did not continue with subsequent stories . strip numbering . the ordinary strips are consecutive numbered from 1 to 10183 . outside this numbering are the two newspaper stories '' in the beginning '' and '' the killing ground '' and the two comic book stories '' modesty blaise '' and '' the dark angels '' . outside the ordinary numbering is also a quantity of a-strips . an a-strip has the same number as the previous strip but followed by an a . they were used on days when not all the newspapers running modesty blaise were published . an a-strip is not vital for the continuity of the story and is often just supplementing the previous strip . the first a-strip was 194a and was published during christmas 1963 in scottish newspapers . since december 1974 , the evening standard has not been published on saturdays . so , since then , and the story '' cry wolf '' , a sixth of the strips have been a-strips and have not had their premiere in the evening standard . a single strip is numbered with an x suffix , e.g . , strip number 3641x , and is similar to the a-strips . reprints and comic book adaptations . many reprint editions of the comic strip have appeared over the years , of varying quality . most reprint the earliest strips , with strips from the 1980s and 1990s being the least often reprinted . in sweden the strip has been in continuous distribution since 1969 in a monthly comic adventure magazine called agent x9 ( after the existing modesty comic magazine agent modesty blaise , started in 1967 , was merged with the x9 magazine ) . many of o'donnell 's stories premiered here ( translated into swedish ) , and the magazine continues to run a modesty blaise story every month , from the archives . when the daily strip was discontinued , artist romero was given permission by o'donnell to do a final modesty blaise story directly for agent x9 magazine . the two-parter was published in 2002 and based on an unused script by o'donnell entitled the dark angels , which o'donnell had previously adapted for the short story collection cobra trap . romero has for the past years also contributed with original painted covers for the agent x9 magazine . in india modesty has acquired a huge fan base and the stories have been published in various magazines starting in 1971 . modesty was featured in kalki magazine ( 1971 ) , kumudam magazine ( 1972 ) , muthu comics ( 1975 ) , lion comics ( 1984 to date ) , rani comics ( 1990–2002 ) & comic world ( 1998 ) in the tamil language . they were also published in english in spectrum comics ( 1985–1986 ) . though other magazines stopped/ceased publishing modesty blaise , lion comics continues to publish her stories regularly . considering the medium , certain images from the stories were edited to make them suitable for child readers . one of the earliest reprints in book form occurred in 1978 when star books—an imprint of wh allen limited—published two paperback-sized compilations of the holdaway-era stories : 1 ) '' in the beginning '' , '' the black pearl '' , and '' the vikings '' , and 2 ) '' la machine '' and '' the long lever '' . these reprints suffered from poor reproduction that rendered many panels illegible . between 1981 and 1986 , ken pierce books inc . of the united states , in conjunction with eclipse comics , published eight volumes of comic book-sized reprints dubbed the first american edition series . the first four books featured holdaway-illustrated stories from the 1960s , while the last four featured strips from the early 1980s as illustrated by neville colvin . these books also suffered from reproduction problems that resulted in many panels being reprinted too light , making them difficult to read . in 1994 , dc comics released a graphic novel adaptation of modesty blaise ( the novel ) , with art by dan spiegle and dick giordano . manuscript press published two volumes of late-1980s romero strips in 2003 ( live bait and lady in the dark ) ; it also published all of the stories not reprinted elsewhere in serialised form in its magazine publications comics revue and modesty blaise quarterly , the former of which , as noted above , also published the dark angels for the first ( and , to date , only ) time in english . comics revue is continuing to reprint modesty blaise strips as of 2015 , although a planned reprint of the dark angels in autumn 2014 was cancelled just before publication when the copyright holders withdrew permission . the american magazine comics revue also continues to reprint the strip , and remains to date the only publisher to have released an english-language version of the dark angels . titan books old series 1985 to 1990 . between 1984 and 1990 , titan books of england published eight volumes of reprints of strips featuring art by holdaway and romero , covering the period 1963 to 1974 . all of the covers were drawn by john m . burns . o'donnell 's final book , cobra trap , is a short story collection . intended by o'donnell to be his literary finale , the final story depicts the deaths of modesty and willie ( with an implied afterlife ) . o'donnell , however , would continue to write the comic strip for several more years , and chose to end it on a more optimistic note , though the comic strip 's finale does not contradict the prose version . beginning in the early 2000s ( decade ) , souvenir press began a series of paperback reprints of the modesty blaise book series , using the first edition hardback covers , and originally concluding with a reprint of cobra trap in 2006 . souvenir subsequently gained the rights to the short story collection pieces of modesty and issued their reprint of that book in march 2010 , with a new cover design based on the original hardback cover from the first modesty novel , at which point all the blaise books fell under the same uk publisher for the first time . in 2008 , penguin books of india reprinted the full series . the 2012 charles stross book the apocalypse codex is , according to the author , a tribute to modesty blaise . stross , charles ( 28 july 2013 ) . crib sheet for the apocalypse codex , blog entry . audio formats . last day in limbo was adapted as a bbc world service six-part radio drama in 1978 with barbara kellerman as modesty , james bolam as willie and richard vernon as tarrant . i had a date with lady janet ( the short story from pieces of modesty ) was published as an audiobook by pickwick talking books in the early 1980s , featuring john thaw as willie ( the story is a first-person tale told from willie garvin 's point of view ) . bbc radio 4 has broadcast adaptations of three of the books in their '' 15 minute drama '' slot , each in five fifteen-minute episodes , adapted by stef penney and produced/directed by kate mcall , starring daphne alexander as modesty , with music by will gregory , arranged by ian gardiner . a taste for death was originally broadcast from 17–21 december 2012 , featuring carl prekopp as willie and alun armstrong as tarrant , with sam dale ( simon delicata ) , geoffrey streatfeild ( steve collier ) , samantha dakin ( dinah pilgrim ) , alex fearns ( mcwhirter ) , jeff mash ( skeet lowery ) and nigel anthony ( sir howard presteign ) . modesty blaise was originally broadcast from 16–20 june 2014 , featuring neil maskell as willie and alun armstrong as tarrant , with ewan bailey ( gabriel ) , alex fearns ( mcwhirter ) , matthew gravelle , john hollingworth and hannah pakeman . the silver mistress was originally broadcast from 13–17 february 2017 , featuring paul bazely as willie and ian mcneice as tarrant , with clare grogan ( clare ) , ewan bailey ( sexton/colonel jim ) , sara markland ( lady janet/angel ) and john ramm ( quinn ) . . in popular culture . the theme song '' modesty ( modesty blaise theme ) '' from the losey movie was sung by david and jonathan , with music composed by john dankworth and lyrics by benny green . this appeared on the soundtrack album issued by 20th century fox ( s 4182 ) and also as a single on the fontana label . the album was released on cd by harkit ( hrkcd 8003 ) in 2001 . rock group sparks wrote and recorded a song intended as the theme tune for the aborted tv series . using an amended title '' modesty plays '' to avoid trademark infringement , it was released originally in 1982 as a france-only single and subsequently in a new version on their 1986 album music that you can dance to . singer russell mael admits that he is actually singing '' blaise '' not '' plays '' . interview in titan reprint of '' cry wolf '' 2006 closterkeller , a polish gothic band , recorded the song '' modesty blaise '' on their 1992 album blue , based on the modesty blaise character . the concept of the 1992 album modesty by the sfry pop rock band bel tempo was inspired by the modesty blaise character . montt mardié from sweden opens his 2005 debut album drama with a song entitled '' modesty blaise '' . british group the direct hits released their 4-track ep the modesty blaise sessions on the forbidden label in 1986 . the first track , '' modesty blaise '' , alludes to the character , especially in her comic-strip form . in the quentin tarantino film pulp fiction , hit-man vincent vega is twice seen reading a modesty blaise book while seated on the toilet . controversy . on 29 june 2020 strip no . 2548 drew controversy from readers of the west australian newspaper for its dialogue , in which the villain in the story used offensive language to refer to indigenous australians . strip no . 2548 and the associated story '' the stone age caper '' , has a villain who makes racist statements . the story had previously been published by the newspaper in 2009 . at that time , the only complaint about the story was that in one panel modesty is shown topless . modesty blaise : the puppet master , peter o'donnell , eric badia romero , titan books , 2006 , on 30 june 2020 the newspaper made a decision that , after 48 years , it would cease publishing modesty blaise . . notes . references . the complete modesty blaise dossier modesty blaise book bibliography . external links . the grand comics database kristy valenti 's three-part article on peter o'donnell – part one , part two and part three at comixology kent hedlundh 's modesty blaise site ( interviews with peter o'donnell , lists of all the comic strip stories , etc . ) the modesty blaise book covers site ( information on the books , with graphics of the many different printings )