Cafe Au Go Go

history . the club was the first new york city venue for the grateful dead . grateful dead at cafe au go go retrieved april 24 , 2012 richie havens and the blues project were weekly regulars as well as harvey brooks who was bass player in residence , the stone poneys featuring linda ronstadt played frequently . the grateful dead played 10 times in 1967 and 3 in 1969 . jimi hendrix sat in with blues harp player james cotton there in 1968 . van morrison , tim hardin , tim buckley , joni mitchell , judy collins , howlin ' wolf , muddy waters , john lee hooker , oscar brown , jr . , the youngbloods , the siegel-schwall band , john hammond , jr . , retrieved june 25 , 2010 paul butterfield , mike bloomfield , jefferson airplane , cream , the chambers brothers , canned heat , the fugs , odetta , country joe and the fish , the yardbirds , the doors all played there . blues legends lightnin ' hopkins , son house , skip james , bukka white , and big joe williams performed at the club after being '' rediscovered '' in the '60s . before many rock groups began performing there , the au go go was an oasis for jazz ( bill evans , stan getz ) , comedy ( lenny bruce , george carlin ) and folk music . rockprosopography retrieved june 26 , 2010 google images retrieved june 25 , 2010 . legal problems . comedian lenny bruce and the club 's owner , howard solomon , were arrested there on obscenity charges in 1964 . in april 1964 , bruce appeared twice at the cafe au go go with undercover police detectives in the audience . on both occasions , he was arrested after leaving the stage , the complaints pertaining to his use of various obscenities ; club owner howard solomon was arrested too . a three-judge panel presided over his widely publicized six-month trial , with bruce and club owner howard solomon both found guilty of obscenity on november 4 , 1964 . the conviction was announced despite positive testimony and petitions of support from woody allen , bob dylan , jules feiffer , allen ginsberg , norman mailer , william styron , and james baldwin – among other artists , writers and educators , and from manhattan journalist and television personality dorothy kilgallen and sociology herbert gans . excerpts from the lenny bruce trial ( cafe au go go ) retrieved june 25 , 2010 bruce was sentenced , on december 21 , 1964 , to four months in the workhouse ; he was set free on bail during the appeals process and died before the appeal was decided . solomon later saw his conviction overturned ; bruce , who died before the decision , never had his conviction stricken in his lifetime . people v . solomon , 26 n.y.2d . 621 on december 23 , 2003 , cbsnews 37 years after his death , bruce was granted a posthumous pardon for his obscenity conviction by new york governor george pataki , press releases following a petition filed by ronald collins and david skover with robert corn-revere as counsel , the petition having been signed by several stars such as robin williams . it was the first posthumous pardon in the state 's history . pataki said his act was '' a declaration of new york 's commitment to upholding the first amendment . '' . au go go singers and comedians . in 1964 , solomon brought in a large group of singers and musicians from an off-broadway show and christened them the au go go singers , to rival the bitter end singers across the street at the bitter end cafe . solomon managed the group until their breakup in late 1965 . the au go go singers included kathy king ( who later toured with bobby vinton and appeared in the broadway show oh calcutta and currently works as kathrin king segal ) , jean gurney , michael scott ( who later performed with the highwaymen and the serendipity singers ) , rick ( frederic ) geiger ( who eventually was accepted into a light opera company in california ) , roy michaels ( who later performed with cat mother & the all night newsboys and toured with jimi hendrix ) , nels gustafson , bob harmelink , and soloists stephen stills and richie furay . ( gustafson and harmelink had been in an earlier trio with furay , but quit show business after the demise of the au go go singers . ) it was also at the cafe au go go that a new folk/rock group , the company , was formed from some remnants of the au go go singers : geiger , michaels , scott & gurney ( who together before the au go go singers performed as the bay singers , a popular group in boston & new york city ) , and stills . immediately after the au go go singers breakup , the rollins and joffe talent agency—managers of dick cavett , woody allen , and other notables—heard a reunion of the bay singers at the cafe au go go and offered the group a six-week canadian tour . rollins and joffe did not originally include stills on the tour , but stills made it known to the bay singers that he wanted to join their group and the tour . very comfortable in performing their arrangements and songs they perfected on their radio show and performances before joining the au go go singers , and knowing that jack rollins and charlie joffe offered the tour based on the singers ' performance , most of the bay singers were hesitant to add another member , but ultimately gave in to stills . the new quintet switched to amplified instruments , took about a week to learn new material ( some under the direction of the former au go go singers arranger , jim friedman ) , named their new group the company , and then headed for ontario . while on tour the group first met local boy neil young , who was performing with the squires , as the opening act for the company . after leaving canada the company played at mr . kelly 's in chicago where woody allen was headlining . in less than a year after the group broke up , stills , young , richie furay , and two others formed the buffalo springfield . howard solomon not only had the au go go singers , but had also booked comedians such as george carlin and lenny bruce , who had regular stints at cafe au go go that would last either from one or two days to three weeks . lenny bruce 's performances at the go go were controversial . on more than one occasion the cafe au go go was raided by the police because of the obscenities that had been used during his performances . by 1966 , the police and the courts had managed to silence lenny bruce and taught him a lesson that he should not use '' foul language '' or show disrespect for the church and the law . eventually bankrupting him just before his death that year . though the police had managed to silence lenny bruce , george carlin continued to do his controversial comedy . carlin eventually went on to have his own trouble with the law . controversy arose because of the use of obscenities in his counter-culture routine known at the '' seven dirty words '' . both lenny bruce and george carlin were two of the most influential stand-up comedy of their time and they along with many others had come out of the cafe au go go . when the cafe au go go closed , the now-famous stephen stills was a featured performer at the gala closing . memoir , al aronowitzretrieved june 25 , 2010 . current use . the cafe au go go and the related garrick cinema buildings were demolished in the 1970s , and the location , at 152 bleecker street , was used for a mid-rise apartment building with a capital one at ground level , which are the current buildings ( as of september 2017 ) , according to google maps . . see also . gerde 's folk city live at the cafe au go go new andy warhol garrick theatre the bitter end the gaslight cafe . references . external links . image : garrick theatre & cafe au go go images : garrick theatre & cafe au go go images : new andy warhol garrick theatre