Return to the Forbidden Planet

plot . act 1 . the plot follows the crew of a routine survey flight under the command of captain tempest . after takeoff , captain tempest converses with the ship 's new science officer , who is a woman , and they argue about the importance of men and women on earth . during their argument , the ship gets caught in a meteor shower . the science officer suggests that they use the shuttle craft and abandon ship , but captain tempest insists on flying through the storm . during the confusion , the science officer escapes the ship via shuttle craft . their spaceship is drawn mysteriously to the planet d'illyria where the crew meet mad scientist doctor prospero , who has been marooned on the planet since his wife and science partner gloria sent him and their daughter miranda into space . doctor prospero offers to help repair the broken starship and he , his daughter , and their robot ariel come aboard . the ship 's cook , cookie , is instantly taken by miranda 's beauty and falls in love with her , a love he thinks she returns . in fact she has fallen in love with captain tempest , against the will of her father . during discussions about locating the missing science officer , ariel reveals information about doctor prospero 's new formula ' x factor ’ , which can enhance the brain and mind . after an argument with his daughter over her love for the captain , doctor prospero takes the draught of ' x factor ' . soon afterwards , the ship is attacked by a foul monster , but during the attack it is revealed that ariel is in the airlock with the missing science officer . to save them both , captain tempest orders the airlock opened , which allows the monster to gain access to the ship . during the confusion of the attack it is revealed that the science officer is doctor prospero 's wife gloria , who is then taken by the monster , as its tentacles attack the rest of the ship . act 2 . the story continues with the attack unfolding again , but this time gloria is n't kidnapped by the monster , and ariel the robot is able to attack the monster to make it retreat . after the attack , more is revealed about doctor prospero and gloria 's past . captain tempest puts gloria under ship arrest for her crimes against her husband . she forms a quick alliance with cookie , whom she persuades to release her and help steal the recipe for doctor prospero 's ' x factor ' in exchange for helping him win over miranda 's heart . gloria talks to cookie , as bosun , the ship 's first mate , talks to captain tempest about how to gain the love of miranda . when the monster returns , it is revealed that it is created by doctor prospero 's mind due to his having taken the ' x factor ' . gloria tells doctor prospero that what she did to him was so that he could keep himself and their daughter safe from the ' x factor ' . doctor prospero has no choice but to leave the ship and sacrifice himself to save the others . once doctor prospero has left , it is then revealed that d'illyria is nothing other than a figment of doctor prospero 's imagination , as it starts to destroy itself once the doctor has died . the ship escapes . once again in space gloria blesses the union of miranda and captain tempest , and cookie is pardoned for his behaviour towards miranda and captain tempest . the show ends with the entire crew safe and well with their science officer back and captain tempest with a new bride . productions . when the musical opened in sydney , australia , the beginning of a national tour , the pre-recorded narrator was clive '' robbo '' robertson , who performed a futuristic parody of his own late-night tv news show , '' newsworld '' . an australian cast album was released in 1991 by ata records . on september 27 , 1991 , an off-broadway production opened in new york at the variety arts theatre , a former nickelodeon movie theatre . return to the forbidden planet was the first theatrical production in the new venue . the cast included julee cruise , known to audiences from her role in twin peaks . the pre-recorded narrator was james doohan , famous as '' scotty '' from star trek . it played to mixed reviews , but was nominated for two outer critics circle awards . it closed on april 26 , 1992 after 243 performances . the show was revived for touring productions in the united kingdom in 1999 , 2001 and 2002 , featuring guest narration from sir patrick moore . in 2003 the brickhouse theatre company produced the musical in cambridge at the robinson college auditorium . the musical was directed by shahzad a . jan and the guest narration was provided by prof . gerry f . gilmore of the institute of astronomy at the university of cambridge . a new production toured the uk in 2006 with the pre-recorded narrator being the astrophysicist and guitarist from queen , brian may . in los angeles , the ark theatre company mounted a production of the musical , under the direction of vanessa claire smith . curtain up - return to the forbidden planet review curtainup.com new line theatre in st . louis , mo staged the show in march 2009 . critic paul friswold of the riverfront times wrote about the production , “ bob carlton 's whimsical take on the tempest as refracted through a 1950s sci-fi prism features a galaxy 's worth of fantastic rock & roll songs , punning wordplays on snippets of shakespearean monologues and intentionally ‘ pigs in space ’ costuming . but this is no parlor trick of a musical ; there 's a rich vein of shakespeare 's favorite ingredient — the wondrous depths of the human heart — that elevates the show from cunning stunt to artful meditation on the destructive nature of power and the redemptive power of love . ” new line theatre 's rttfp webpage bob carlton was the artistic director at the queen 's theatre , hornchurch , essex , uk from the nineties . his final production at the theatre was of return to the forbidden planet on 15 november 2014 . this theatre has one of the last remaining through-cast repertory companies in the country . here , as part of the rep season , '' return to the forbidden planet '' , was put on in august–september 2012 , directed by bob carlton . richard o'brien appeared as the narrator , musical supervisor was julian littman , musical director greg last and choreographer frido ruth . in 2019 , red bull theater mounted a one-night-only concert performance at symphony space in new york , benefitting the theater 's upcoming productions . the production featured tony award nominees steven boyer , robert cuccioli , patrick page , mary testa , kim exum , kevin r . free , jo lampert , amy spanger , charlotte maltby , jeffrey eugene johnson , ben jones and salisha thomas , with direction by gabriel barre and music direction by greg pliska . astrophysicist neil degrasse tyson also made a special appearance . hornchurch 2012 cast . references . external links . us licensing details at samuel french uk licensing details at josef weinberger new york times review of off broadway production