Maeve Binchy

biography . overview . . early life and family . anne maeve binchy was born on 28 may 1939 in dalkey , the oldest of the four children of william and maureen ( née blackmore ) binchy . her siblings include one brother , william binchy , regius professor of laws at trinity college , dublin , and two sisters : irene '' renie '' ( who predeceased binchy ) , and joan , mrs ryan . her uncle was the historian d . a . binchy ( 1899–1989 ) . educated at st anne 's ( then located at no 35 clarinda park east ) , dún laoghaire , and later at holy child killiney , she went on to study at university college dublin ( where she earned a bachelor 's degree in history ) , she worked as a teacher of french , latin , and history at various girls ' schools , then a journalist at the irish times , and later became a writer of novels , short story , and dramatic works . in 1968 , her mother died of cancer aged 57 . after binchy 's father died in 1971 , she sold the family house and moved to a bedsit in dublin . . israel . her parents were catholics and binchy attended a convent school . however , a trip to israel profoundly affected both her career and her faith . she later said to vulture : in 1963 , i worked in a jewish school in dublin , teaching french with an irish accent to kids , primarily lithuanians . the parents there gave me a trip to israel as a present . i had no money , so i went and worked in a kibbutz – plucking chickens , picking oranges . my parents were very nervous ; here i was going out to the middle east by myself . i wrote to them regularly , telling them about the kibbutz . my father and mother sent my letters to a newspaper , which published them . so i thought , it 's not so hard to be a writer . just write a letter home . after that , i started writing other travel articles . one sunday , attempting to locate where the last supper is supposed to have occurred , she climbed a mountainside to a cavern guarded by a brooklyn-born israeli soldier . she wept with despair . the soldier asked , '' what'ya expect , ma'am – a renaissance table set for 13 ? '' she replied , '' yes ! that 's just what i did expect . '' this experience caused her to renounce her catholic faith , and eventually become agnostic . . marriage . binchy , described as '' six feet tall , rather stout , and garrulous '' , although she actually grew to 6 ' 1 '' , said in an interview with gay byrne of the late late show that , growing up in dalkey , she never felt herself to be attractive ; '' as a plump girl i did n't start on an even footing to everyone else '' . after her mother 's death , she expected to lead a life of spinsterhood , saying '' i expected i would live at home , as i always did . '' she continued , '' i felt very lonely , the others all had a love waiting for them and i did n't . '' however , when recording a piece for woman 's hour in london she met children 's author gordon snell , then a freelance producer with the bbc . their friendship blossomed into a cross-border romance , with her in ireland and him in london , until she eventually secured a job in london through the irish times . she and snell married in 1977 and , after living in london for a time , moved to ireland . they lived together in dalkey , not far from where she had grown up , until binchy 's death . she said of him that he was a '' writer , a man i loved and he loved me and we got married and it was great and is still great . he believed i could do anything , just as my parents had believed all those years ago , and i started to write fiction and that took off fine . and he loved ireland , and the fax was invented so we writers could live anywhere we liked , instead of living in london near publishers . . letter to the president . files in ireland 's national archives , released to the public in 2006 , feature a request from maeve binchy to president cearbhall ó dálaigh asking if he could '' receive '' her . she wrote , '' i know you are extremely busy but i often see in the paper that you 'received ' so-and-so and was wondering very simply could i be received too . '' this request came while she was working for the irish times in london in 1975 . . health . in 2002 , binchy suffered health problems related to a heart condition , which inspired her to write heart and soul . the book , about what binchy terms '' a heart failure clinic '' in dublin and the people involved with it , reflects many of her own experiences and observations in the hospital . towards the end of her life , binchy 's website stated '' my health is n't so good these days and i ca n't travel around to meet people the way i used to . but i 'm always delighted to hear from readers , even if it takes me a while to reply . '' . death . binchy died on 30 july 2012 . she was 73 and had suffered from various maladies , including painful osteoarthritis . as a result of the arthritis she had a hip operation . a month before her death she suffered a severe spinal infection ( acute discitis ) , and finally succumbed to a heart attack . gordon was by her side when she died in a dublin hospital . just ahead of that evening 's tonight with vincent browne and tv3 's late evening news , vincent browne and then alan cantwell , who respectively anchor these shows , announced to irish television viewers that binchy had died earlier that evening . immediate media reports described binchy as '' beloved '' , '' ireland 's most well-known novelist '' and the '' best-loved writer of her generation '' . fellow writers mourned their loss , including ian rankin , jilly cooper , anne rice , and jeffrey archer . politicians also paid tribute . president michael d . higgins stated : '' our country mourns . '' taoiseach enda kenny said , '' today we have lost a national treasure . '' minister of state for disability , equality and mental health kathleen lynch , appearing as a guest on tonight with vincent browne , said binchy was , for her ( lynch 's ) money , as worthy an irish writer as james joyce or oscar wilde , and praised her for selling so many more books than they managed . in the days after her death tributes were published from such writers as john banville , roddy doyle , and colm tóibín . banville contrasted binchy with gore vidal , who died the day after her , observing that vidal '' used to say that it was not enough for him to succeed , but others must fail . maeve wanted everyone to be a success . '' numerous tributes appeared in publications on both sides of the atlantic , including the guardian and cbc news . shortly before her death , binchy told the irish times : '' i do n't have any regrets about any roads i did n't take . everything went well , and i think that 's been a help because i can look back , and i do get great pleasure out of looking back & nbsp ; . i 've been very lucky and i have a happy old age with good family and friends still around . '' just before dying , she read her latest short story at the dalkey book festival . she once said she would like to die '' . & nbsp ; on my 100th birthday , piloting gordon and myself into the side of a mountain '' . despite being an agnostic , binchy was given a traditional requiem mass which took place at the church of the assumption , in her hometown of dalkey . she was later cremated at mount jerome cemetery and crematorium . . work . journalism . the new york times reports : binchy 's '' writing career began by accident in the early 1960s , after she spent time on a kibbutz in israel . her father was so taken with her letters home that '' he cut off the ‘ dear daddy ’ bits , ” ms . binchy later recounted , and sent them to an irish newspaper , which published them . '' donal lynch observed of her first paying journalism role : the irish independent '' was impressed enough to commission her , paying her £16 , which was then a week-and-a-half 's salary for her . '' in 1968 , binchy joined the staff at the irish times , and worked there as a writer , columnist , the first women 's page editor then the london editor , later reporting for the paper from london before returning to ireland . binchy 's first published book is a compilation of her newspaper articles titled my first book . published in 1970 , it is now out of print . as binchy 's bio posted at read ireland describes : '' the dublin section of the book contains insightful case histories that prefigure her novelist 's interest in character . the rest of the book is mainly humorous , and particularly droll is her account of a skiing holiday , ' i was a winter sport . ' '' . literature . in all , binchy published 16 novels , four short-story collections , a play and a novella . a 17th novel , a week in winter , was published posthumously . her literary career began with two books of short stories : central line ( 1978 ) and victoria line ( 1980 ) . she published her debut novel light a penny candle in 1982 . in 1983 , it sold for the largest sum ever paid for a first novel : £52,000 . the timing was fortuitous , as binchy and her husband were two months behind with the mortgage at the time . however , the prolific binchy – who joked that she could write as fast as she could talk – ultimately became one of ireland 's richest women . her first book was rejected five times . she would later describe these rejections as '' a slap in the face . it 's like if you do n't go to a dance you can never be rejected but you 'll never get to dance either '' . most of binchy 's stories are set in ireland , dealing with the tensions between urban and rural life , the contrasts between england and ireland , and the dramatic changes in ireland between world war ii and the present day . her books have been translated into 37 languages . while some of binchy 's novels are complete stories ( circle of friends , light a penny candle ) , many others revolve around a cast of interrelated characters ( the copper beech , silver wedding , the lilac bus , evening class , and heart and soul ) . her later novels , evening class , scarlet feather , quentins , and tara road , feature a cast of recurring characters . binchy announced in 2000 that she would not tour any more of her novels , but would instead be devoting her time to other activities and to her husband , gordon snell . five further novels were published before her death : quentins ( 2002 ) , nights of rain and stars ( 2004 ) , whitethorn woods ( 2006 ) , heart and soul ( 2008 ) , and minding frankie ( 2010 ) . her final novel , a week in winter , was published posthumously in 2012 . in 2014 a collection of 36 unpublished short stories that she had written over a period of decades was published under the title chestnut street . binchy wrote several dramas specifically for radio and the silver screen . additionally , several of her novels and short stories were adapted for radio , film , and television . ( see films.2c radio.2c and television . ) . public appearances . binchy appeared on the the late late show on saturday 20 march ( based on chronology this would have been 1982 ) in connection with the publication of the dublin 4 short story collection . '' then the conversation broadened and gay byrne asked about some aspects of my work , the royal weddings '' , binchy later recalled in a letter she sent to the programme . '' i said how much i had liked charles 's wedding and hated anne 's - about covering the election in ireland and how i had been one of the very few journalists watching fitzgerald and haughey on the night of the great debate . '' following the publication of light a penny candle , the programme sought binchy to reappear to explain her success . in advance of her appearance she sent mary o'sullivan , who was working on the programmme , a letter ( the same one referred to above ) setting out her earnings in some detail , since binchy thought this would be of relevance . print edition , with original title of '' big read : the circle of life of circle of friends '' , included '' maeve 's letter explaining how she earned her new-found success '' , which binchy sent to mary o'sullivan before an appearance on the late late show on which o'sullivan was working . she received an initial 5,000 irish pounds for light a penny candle . the paperback rights were sold for a british record for a first novel with a prepublication advance of £52,000 from coronet . viking press paid binchy 200,000 for the u.s . hardcover edition . the literary guild of america paid a further 50,000 . the french publisher paid binchy 50,000 francs . binchy wrote to o'sullivan , '' i thought it would be better if you knew the exact figures , then you could decide what was and what was not relevant '' . o'sullivan republished the letter in the sunday independents living supplement in 2020 but mentioned that the last page , which followed on from binchy referring to what she intended to do with all her money , was missing . in 1994 , binchy appeared on morningside with peter gzowski . in 1999 , binchy appeared on the oprah winfrey show . in 2009 , she appeared on the meaning of life , also presented by gay byrne . binchy and her husband had a cameo appearance together in fair city on 14 december 2011 , during which the couple dined in the hungry pig . . awards and honours . in 1978 , binchy won a jacob 's award for her rté play , deeply regretted by . a 1993 photograph of her by richard whitehead belongs to the collection of the national portrait gallery national portrait gallery : maeve binchy . and a painting of her by maeve mccarthy , commissioned in 2005 , is on display in the national gallery of ireland . national gallery unveils portrait of maeve binchy , national gallery of ireland , october 2005 . in 1999 , she received the galaxy national book awards . in 2000 , she received a people of the year award . in 2001 , scarlet feather won the w h smith , defeating works by joanna trollope and then reigning booker winner margaret atwood , amongst other contenders . in 2007 , she received the irish pen award , joining such luminaries as john b . keane , brian friel , edna o'brien , william trevor , john mcgahern and seamus heaney . in 2010 , she received a lifetime achievement award from the irish book awards . in 2012 , she received an irish book award in the '' irish popular fiction book '' category for a week in winter . . posthumous . there were posthumous proposals to name a new liffey crossing '' binchy bridge '' in memory of the writer . ultimately the bridge was named for trade unionist rosie hackett . in september 2012 , a new garden behind the dalkey library in county dublin was dedicated in memory of binchy . in 2014 the university of dublin announced the first annual maeve binchy travel award . the €4000 award will help student winners '' pursue a novel travel trip to enhance their writing skills '' . . list of works . publications . binchy published novels , non-fiction , a play and several short story collections . two collections of short stories , chestnut street ( 2014 ) and a few of the girls ( 2015 ) , were released after her death . ; novels light a penny candle ( 1982 ) echoes ( 1985 ) firefly summer ( 1987 ) silver wedding ( 1988 ) circle of friends ( 1990 ) the copper beech ( 1992 ) the glass lake ( 1994 ) evening class ( 1996 ) tara road ( 1998 ) scarlet feather ( 2000 ) quentins ( 2002 ) nights of rain and stars ( 2004 ) whitethorn woods ( 2006 ) heart and soul ( 2008 ) minding frankie ( 2010 ) a week in winter ( 2012 ) ; short story collections central line ( 1978 ) victoria line ( 1980 ) dublin 4 ( 1981 ) london transports ( 1983 ) ( london transports and victoria line central line consist of the same stories ) . the lilac bus ( 1984 ) story teller : collection of short stories ( 1990 ) dublin people ( 1993 ) cross lines ( 1996 ) this year it will be different : and other stories ( 1996 ) the return journey ( 1998 ) chestnut street ( 2014 ) a few of the girls ( 2015 ) ; novellas the builders ( 2002 ) star sullivan ( 2006 ) full house ( 2012 ) ; non-fiction my first book ( 1970 ) . dublin : the irish times , ltd . aches and pains ( 1999 ) a time to dance ( 2006 ) the maeve binchy writer 's club ( 2008 ) maeve 's times : in her own words ( 2015 ) ; plays deeply regretted by . ( 2005 ) ; other works finbar 's hotel ( contributor ) ladies night at finbar 's hotel ( contributor ) irish girls about town ( 2002 ) ( editor with cathy kelly and marian keyes ) . films , radio , and television . binchy wrote several dramas specifically for radio and the silver screen . additionally , several of her novels and short stories were adapted for radio , film , and television . . films . circle of friends ( 1995 film ) – hollywood film starring chris o'donnell and minnie driver , based on binchy 's fifth novel , circle of friends ( 1990 ) with a radical change of ending . tara road ( 2005 ) – hollywood film starring olivia williams and andie macdowell and based on binchy 's sixth novel , tara road ( 1998 ) – which was adopted as an oprah 's book club selection in september 1999 . how about you ( 2007 ) – irish film based on the short story '' how about you '' ( sometimes published as '' the hard core '' ) and starring vanessa redgrave , joss ackland , brenda fricker , and imelda staunton , from the short story collection titled this year it will be different : and other stories ( 1996 ) . in addition , the plot of the danish film italian for beginners ( 2000 ) was taken in part from binchy 's novel evening class without credit or payment to her ; the production company later settled with binchy for a payment of an undisclosed amount . radio . since 1968 , binchy was a '' frequent and hugely popular contributor to rté radio '' . a press released dated 31 july 2012 and posted in that organisation 's online press centre reads : : : '' rté radio 1 provided the platform for maeve 's many forays into the world of drama . in 2005 rté 2fm dj gerry ryan was among the cast of surprise , a four-part radio drama written by maeve . other radio drama work included the award-winning infancy and tia maria , starring oscar winner kathy bates . maeve was a driving force behind the rté radio 1 human rights drama seasons , while her story the games room was adapted for rté radio 1 by anne-marie casey in 2009 . '' . television . deeply regretted by . ( 1978 ) – binchy won a jacob 's award for this rté one television play , which was filmed in ireland and stars donal farmer and joan o'hara . echoes ( 1988 ) – four-part television miniseries on channel 4 , based on binchy 's second novel , echoes ( published in 1985 ) . the lilac bus ( 1990 ) – 90-minute tv movie , starring stephanie beacham , emmet bergin , and brendan conroy , based on binchy 's collection of interrelated short stories titled the lilac bus ( first published in 1984 ) maeve binchy 's anner house ( 2007 ) – 90-minute tv movie , filmed in cape town , that aired on rté television . the film stars liam cunningham , flora montgomery , and conor mullen , and is based on a short story by binchy . the screenplay was written by anne-marie casey . . see also . list of fair city characters . references . in season 3 episode 7 of ballykissangel , one road worker tosses a book to another , saying , '' the latest maeve binchy ! '' . further reading . interview with jana siciliano . . external links . maeve binchy profile at the irish times , accessed 25 february 2015 .