Madison Avenue

route . madison avenue carries one-way traffic uptown ( northbound ) from east 23rd street to east 135th street , with the changeover from two-way traffic taking place on january 14 , 1966 , at which time fifth avenue was changed to one-way downtown ( southbound ) . kihss , peter . '' 5th and madison avenues become one-way friday ; change to come 7 weeks ahead of schedule to ease strike traffic 5th and madison to be made one-way friday '' , the new york times , january 12 , 1966 . accessed december 6 , 2007 . '' the long-argued conversion of fifth and madison avenues to one-way streets will start at 6 a.m . friday seven weeks ahead of schedule to ease congestion caused by the transit strike . '' between east 135th street and east 142nd street , madison avenue carries southbound traffic only and runs parallel to the harlem river drive . there are numerous structures designated as new york city landmarks ( nycl ) , national historic landmarks ( nhl ) , and national register of historic places ( nrhp ) on madison avenue . from south to north ( in increasing address order ) , they include : interactive map : metropolitan life insurance company tower ( nycl , nhl , nrhp ) appellate division courthouse of new york state ( nycl , nrhp ) new york life building ( nycl , nhl , nrhp ) hotel seville ( nycl ) emmet building ( nycl ) colony club ( nycl , nrhp ) madison belmont building ( nycl ) b . altman and company building ( nycl ) church of the incarnation , episcopal ( nycl , nrhp ) morgan library & museum ( nycl , nhl , nrhp ) joseph raphael de lamar house ( nycl , nrhp ) 275 madison avenue ( nycl ) 400 madison avenue ( nycl ) st . patrick 's cathedral ( nycl , nhl , nrhp ) villard houses ( nycl , nrhp ) look building ( nycl ) '' . named for one of its first tenants — look magazine , which folded in 1971 . other tenants have included esquire magazine and pocket books . '' 550 madison avenue ( nycl ) fuller building ( nycl ) 45 east 66th street ( nycl ) gertrude rhinelander waldo house ( nycl , nrhp ) 1261 madison avenue ( nycl ) 1321 madison avenue ( nycl ) squadron a armory ( nycl , nrhp ) all saints church ( nycl ) . role in advertising industry . the term '' madison avenue '' is often used metonymically to stand for the american advertising industry . madison avenue became identified with advertising after that sector 's explosive growth in this area in the 1920s . according to '' the emergence of advertising in america '' , by the year 1861 , there were twenty advertising agencies in new york city ; and the new york city association of advertising agencies was founded in 1911 , predating the establishment of the american association of advertising agencies by several years . among various depictions in popular culture , the portion of the advertising industry which centers on madison avenue serves as a backdrop for the amc television drama mad men , which focuses on industry activities during the 1960s . in recent decades , many agencies have left madison avenue , with some moving further downtown and others moving west . deborah leslie , '' abandoning madison avenue : the relocation of advertising services in new york city . '' urban geography ( 1997 ) 18 7 pp : 568-590 . the continued presence of large agencies in the city made new york the third-largest job market per capita in the u.s . in 2016 , according to a study by marketing recruitment firm marketpro . today , several agencies are still located in the old business cluster on madison avenue , including strawberryfrog , tbwa worldwide , organic , inc . , and ddb worldwide . however , the term is still used to describe the agency business as a whole and large , new york–based agencies in particular . . madison square park and madison square garden . madison square park is a event horizon : mad . sq . art . : antony gormley installation guide published by the madison square park conservancy public park which runs along madison avenue from east 26th street to east 23rd street . it is bordered on the west by fifth avenue and broadway as they cross . the park was named for james madison , fourth president of the united states . mendelsohn , joyce . '' madison square '' in madison square garden took its name from the location of madison square garden ( 1879 ) , located on the northeast corner of madison avenue at 26th street , across from the park . the first garden was a former railroad terminal for the park avenue main line , which was converted into an open-air circus venue by p . t . barnum in 1871 and was renamed '' madison square garden '' in 1879 . ( the new york life building now occupies that entire city block . ) the original garden was demolished in 1889 and replaced by a new indoor arena designed by stanford white that opened the following year . the second garden had a bronze statue of the roman goddess diana on the tower of the sports arena . when it moved to a new building at 50th street and eighth avenue in 1925 it kept its old name . madison square garden is now located at eighth avenue between 31st and 33rd street ; however , it still retains the name . economy . retail brands with locations on madison avenue include : burberry , manrico cashmere , brooks brothers , alexander mcqueen , hermès , tom ford , céline , proenza schouler , lanvin , valentino , stuart weitzman , nycgo.com christina parrella , mad about shopping : madison avenue 09/11/2013 damiani , emporio armani , prada , chloé , roberto cavalli , davidoff , dolce & gabbana , gucci , calvin klein , cartier , christian louboutin , la perla , jimmy choo , jacadi , mulberry , victoria 's secret , barneys new york , coach , rolex , giorgio armani , oliver peoples , vera wang , anne fontaine , baccarat , carolina herrera , ralph lauren and others . nyc.com madison avenue shopping . transportation . buses and bus lane . madison avenue is served by the local mta regional bus operations ; the express new york city transit buses ; and the bxm4c express bee line bus . these buses use a double exclusive bus lane between 42nd and 59th streets , which comprise the only exclusive bus lane along the avenue . although no new york city subway stations are named after madison avenue , the fifth avenue/53rd street station on the has an entrance on madison avenue . pursuant to section 4-12 ( m ) of the new york city traffic rules , new york city traffic rules , new york city department of transportation . driving a vehicle other than a bus in the bus lane on madison avenue to turn right during the restricted hours specified by sign between 42nd street and 59th street is prohibited , then permitted at 60th street , but a taxicab carrying a passenger may use the bus lane to turn right at 46th street . bikes are excluded from this prohibition . overturned midtown bike ban . in july 1987 , then-new york city mayor edward koch proposed banning bicycling on fifth , park and madison avenues during weekdays , but many bicyclists protested and had the ban overturned . dunham , mary frances . '' bicycle blueprint – fifth , park and madison '' , transportation alternatives . accessed april 27 , 2009 . when the trial was started on monday , august 24 , 1987 for 90 days to ban bicyclists from these three avenues from 31st street to 59th street between 10 a.m . and 4 p.m . on weekdays , mopeds would not be banned . yee , marilynn k . '' ban on bikes could bring more mopeds '' , the new york times , tuesday , august 25 , 1987 . accessed april 27 , 2009 . . references . external links .