Kiteboarding

history . late 20th century . in october 1977 gijsbertus adrianus panhuise ( netherlands ) received the first patent patent nl7603691 ( a ) ― 11 october 1977 for kitesurfing . the patent covers , specifically , a water sport using a floating board of a surf board type where a pilot standing up on it is pulled by a wind catching device of a parachute type tied to his harness on a trapeze type belt . although this patent did not result in any commercial interest , gijsbertus adrianus panhuise could be considered as the originator of kitesurfing . through the 1980s , there were occasionally successful attempts to combine kites with canoes , ice skates , snow skis , mark harris sea kayaking and kites , july 2002 water skis and roller skates . throughout the 1970s and early 1980s , dieter strasilla from germany developed parachute-skiing and later perfected a kite-skiing system using self-made paragliders and a ball-socket swivel allowing the pilot to sail upwind and uphill but also to take off into the air at will . strasilla and his swiss friend andrea kuhn used this invention also in combination with surfboards and snowboards , grasskies and self-made buggies . one of his patents describes in 1979 the first use of an inflatable kite design for kitesurfing . patent de2933050 two brothers , bruno legaignoux and dominique legaignoux , from the atlantic coast of france , developed kites for kitesurfing in the late 1970s and early 1980s and patented an inflatable kite design in november 1984 , a design that has been used by companies to develop their own products . the development of modern-day kitesurfing by the roeselers in the united states and the legaignoux in france carried on in parallel to buggying . bill roeseler , a boeing aerodynamicist , and his son cory roeseler patented the '' kiteski '' system which consisted of water skis powered by a two-line delta style kite controlled via a bar mounted combined winch/brake . the kiteski was commercially available in 1994 . the kite had a rudimentary water launch capability and could go upwind . in 1995 , cory roeseler visited peter lynn at new zealand 's lake clearwater in the ashburton alpine lakes area , demonstrating speed , balance and upwind angle on his 'ski ' . in the late 1990s , cory 's ski evolved to a single board similar to a surfboard . peter lynn a brief history of kitesurfing , aquilandia.com , 2006 in 1996 , laird hamilton and manu bertin were instrumental in demonstrating and popularising kitesurfing off the hawaii a coast of maui while in florida raphaël baruch changed the name of the sport from flysurfing to kitesurfing by starting and promoting the first commercial brand of the industry '' kitesurf '' . in 1997 , the legaignoux brothers developed and sold the breakthrough '' wipika '' kite design which had a structure of preformed inflatable tubes and a simple bridle system to the wingtips , both of which greatly assisted water re-launch . bruno legaignoux has continued to improve kite designs , including developing the bow kite design , which has been licensed to many kite manufacturers . in 1997 , specialized kiteboards were developed by raphaël salles and laurent ness . by the end of 1998 kitesurfing had become an extreme sport , distributed and taught through a handful group of shops and schools worldwide . the first competition was held on maui in september 1998 and won by flash austin . starting in 1999 , kitesurfing became a mainstream sport with the entry of key windsurfing manufacturers namely robby naish and neil pryde . single direction boards derived from windsurfing and surfing designs became the dominant form of kiteboard . 21st century . in 2000 , a new freestyle competition , sponsored by red bull was launched in maui . the competition , named red bull king of the air , judged riders on height , versatility , and style . the competition is still held annually in cape town , south africa . from 2001 onwards , twin-tip bi-directional boards became more popular for most flat water riders , with directional boards still in use for surf conditions . in may 2012 , the course racing style of kitesurfing was announced as a sport for the 2016 rio olympics , replacing windsurfing . however , after a vote by the general assembly of isaf in november 2012 ( in dun laoghaire , ireland ) the rsx windsurfer was reinstated for both men and women this was an unprecedented decision when the constituent members of isaf overthrew a decision made by the isaf council kitesurfing remains therefore a non-olympic sport until 2020 at the earliest . the isaf mid-year meeting of may 2013 proposed seeking an eleventh medal to include kitesurfing in 2020 at the same time there was a commitment made to retain the existing other 10 classes as they are for 2020 and even 2024 including the rsx windsurfer for men and women . kitesurfing was named as an official event at the 2018 summer youth olympics in buenos aires . . kitesurfing records . jump records ( height , length , time ) . nick jacobsen achieved the world record for the highest kite jump measured by woo sports on february 19 , 2017 in cape town , south africa , during a session with 40-knot winds . jacobsen 's jump reached 28.6 meters high , with an airtime of 8.5 seconds . the record was broken several times since then and woo sports maintains jump-related leaderboards in different categories ( airtime , height , etc . ) based on the data recorded and uploaded by its users . the current record holder for the height of a single jump is maarten haeger at 34.8m . jesse richman holds the record for hangtime at 22 seconds , set at crissy field in san francisco , california . airton cozzolino holds the record for strapless hangtime at 19 seconds . . speed records . france kitesurfer became the first sailor to break the 50 knots barrier by reaching 50.26 knots on 3 october 2008 at the lüderitz speed challenge in namibia . on 4 october , ( also of france ) broke this record with a 50.57 knots run . similar speeds are reached by windsurfers in the same location by anders bringdal and antoine albeau , respectively 50.46 and 50.59 knots . these speeds are verified , but are still subject to ratification by the world sailing speed record council . earlier in the event , on 19 september , american rob douglas reached 49.84 knots ( 92.30 & nbsp ; km/h ) , becoming the first kitesurfer to establish an outright world record in speed sailing . previously the record was held only by sailboats or windsurfers . douglas also became the world 's third over-50 knots sailor , when on 8 september he made a 50.54 knots ( 93.60 & nbsp ; km/h ) run . on 14 november 2009 , alex caizergues completed another run of 50.98 knots in namibia . october 2010 , rob douglas became the outright record holder for the short distance 500 meters with 55.65 knots . '' isaf rolex sailor of the year awards : rob douglas ( usa ) , '' international sailing federation , www.sailing.org/ sébastien cattelan became the record holder of france and europe with 55.49 and was the first rider to reach 55 knots . on 13 november 2017 , french rider became the new world speed record holder in france ( salin de giraud ) reaching 57.97 knots or 107.36 & nbsp ; km/h . . long distance . . see also . foilboard kite applications kite landboarding kite mooring kiteboating kite rig list of books about kites skysails snowkiting windsport . references . external links . please be cautious in adding more links to this article . wikipedia is not a collection of links . excessive or inappropriate links will be deleted . see wikipedia : external links and wikipedia : spam for details . if there are already plentiful links , please propose additions or replacements on this article 's discussion page . or submit your link to the appropriate category at the open directory project ( www.dmoz.org ) and link back to that category using the template .