Wusun

etymology . wusun is a modern pronunciation of the chinese characters '烏孫 ' . the chinese name '烏孫 ' ( wūsūn ) literally means wū 'crow , raven ' + sūn 'grandson , descendant' . there are several theories about the origin of the name . 王明哲 , 王炳華 ( mingzhe wang & binhua wang ) : 從文獻與考古資料論烏孫歷史的幾個重大問題 ( important questions about the history of wusun arising from the contemporary documents and archaeological investigations ) . in : 烏孫研究 ( wusun research ) , 1 , 新疆人民出版社 ( people 's publisher xinjiang ) , ürümqi 1983 , s . pp . 1–42 . sinologist victor h . mair compared wusun with sanskrit áśva 'horse ' , aśvin 'mare ' and lithuanian ašvà 'mare ' . the name would thus mean 'the horse people ' . hence he put forward the hypothesis that the wusun used a satem-like language within the indo-european languages . however , the latter hypothesis is not supported by edwin g . pulleyblank . edwin g . pulleyblank , '' why tocharians ? '' , central asia and non-chinese peoples of ancient china , vol . & nbsp ; 1 . aldershot , hampshire ; burlington , vt : ashgate publishing , 2002 , , pp . & nbsp ; 426–427 . christopher i . beckwith 's analysis is similar to mair 's , reconstructing the chinese term wusun as old chinese âswin , which he compares to old indic aśvin 'the horsemen ' , the name of the rigvedic ashvins . étienne de la vaissière identifies the wusun with enemies of the sogdian-speaking kangju confederation , whom sogdians mentioned on kultobe inscriptions as wδ'nn ' p . wδ'nn ' p contains two morpheme n ' p '' people '' and wδ ' n wiðan , which is cognate with parthian language wd ' n and means '' tent '' . vaissière hypothesized that the wusun likely spoke an iranian language closely related to sogdian , permitting sogdians to translate their endonym as wδ ' n wiðan and chinese to transcribe their endonym with a native /s/ standing for a foreign dental fricative . therefore , vaissière reconstructs wusun 's endonym as wəθan '' people of the tent ( s ) '' . . history . early history . the wusun were first mentioned by china sources as living together with the yuezhi between the qilian mountains and dunhuang ( gansu ) , hanshu 《漢書·張騫李廣利傳》 original text 臣居匈奴中，聞烏孫王號昆莫。昆莫父難兜靡本與大月氏俱在祁連、焞煌間，小國也。tr . '' i , your majesty 's minister , while living among the xiongnu , heard that the wusun king was called kunmo ; kunmo 's father nandoumi had originally been dwelling together with the great yuezhi in a small state between qilian and dunhuang . '' although different locations have been suggested for these toponyms . xinru liu , migration and settlement of the yuezhi-kushan : interaction and interdependence of nomadic and sedentary societies ( 2001 ) beckwith suggests that the wusun were an eastern remnant of the indo-aryans , who had been suddenly pushed to the extremities of the eurasian steppe by the iranian peoples in the 2nd & nbsp ; millennium & nbsp ; bce . around 210–200 & nbsp ; bce , prince modu chanyu , a former hostage of the yuezhi and prince of the xiongnu , who were also vassals of the yuezhi , became leader of the xiongnu and conquered the asian steppe , subjugating several peoples . around 176 & nbsp ; bce modu chanyu launched a fierce raid against the yuezhi . around 173 & nbsp ; bce , the yuezhi subsequently attacked the wusun , at that time a small nation , killing their king ( kunmi or kunmo nandoumi . according to legend nandoumi 's infant son liejiaomi was left in the wild . he was miraculously saved from hunger being suckled by a she-wolf , and fed meat by ravens . shiji 《史記·大宛列傳》 original text : 匈奴攻殺其父，而昆莫生棄於野。烏嗛肉蜚其上，狼往乳之。 the wusun ancestor myth shares striking similarities with those of the hittites , the zhou dynasty , the scythians , the romans , the koguryo , turks , mongols and dzungars . based on the similarities between the ancestor myth of the wusun and later turkic peoples , denis sinor has suggested that the wusun , sogdians , or both could represent an indo-aryan influence , or even the origin of the royal ashina türks . in 162 & nbsp ; bce , the yuezhi were finally defeated by the xiongnu , after which they fled gansu . according to zhang qian , the yuezhi were defeated by the rising xiongnu empire and fled westward , driving away the sai ( scythians ) from the ili river in the zhetysu and dzungaria area . hanshu 《漢書·張騫李廣利傳》 original text 時，月氏已為匈奴所破，西擊塞王。 the sai would subsequently migrate into south asia , where they founded various indo-scythian kingdoms . after the yuezhi retreat the wusun subsequently settled the modern province of gansu , in the valley of the wushui-he ( lit . '' raven water-river '' ) , as vassals of the xiongnu . it is not clear whether the river was named after the tribe or vice versa . migration to the ili valley . the xiongnu ruler was impressed with liejiaomi , considering him a supernatural being , and adopted the child . when the child grew up the chanyu made him leader of the wusun and a xiongnu general . he won many victories for the xiongnu and the wusun became powerful . liejiaomi constantly requested the xiongnu ruler for permission to revenge his father , and around 133–132 & nbsp ; bce , he successfully attacked the yuezhi in the ili valley . the yuezhi then migrated to sogdia and then bactria , where they became unified under kujula kadphises and expanded into south asia , founding the kushan empire , which at its peak under kanishka stretched from turpan in the tarim basin to pataliputra on the gangetic plain and played an important role in the development of the silk road and the transmission of buddhism to china . the wusun subsequently took over the ili valley , expanding over a large area and trying to keep away from the xiongnu . according to shiji , wusun was a state located west of the xiongnu . shiji 《史記·大宛列傳》 original text : 匈奴西邊小國也 when the xiongnu ruler died , liejiaomi refused to serve the xiongnu . the xiongnu then sent a force to against the wusun but were defeated , after which the xiongnu even more than before considered liejiaomi a supernatural being , avoiding conflict with him . . establishing relations with the han . after settling in the ili valley the wusun became so strong that the han was compelled to win their friendship in alliance . chinese sources name the scythian sai ( saka ) , and the yuezhi who are often identified as tocharians , among the people of the wusun state in the zhetysu and dzungaria area . the wusun realm probably included both yuezhi and saka . it is clear that the majority of the population consisted of linguistically iranian saka tribes . in 125 & nbsp ; bce , under the han dynasty wu of han ( 156-87 & nbsp ; bce ) , the chinese traveller and diplomat zhang qian was sent to establish an alliance with the wusun against the xiongnu . yap , joseph p , ( 2019 ) . the western regions , xiongnu and han , from the shiji , hanshu and hou hanshu , p . 164 . qian estimated the wusun to number 630,000 , with 120,000 families and 188,000 men capable of bearing arms . ( hanshu , ch.61 & 96 ) hanshu described them as occupying land that previously belonged to the saka ( sai ) . hanshu 《漢書·卷九十六下》 西域傳 original text : 本塞地也，大月氏西破走塞王，塞王南越縣度。大月氏居其地。後烏孫昆莫擊破大月氏，大月氏徙西臣大夏，而烏孫昆莫居之，故烏孫民有塞種、大月氏種雲。 to their north-west the wusun bordered kangju , located in modern kazakhstan . to the west was dayuan ( ferghana ) , and to the south were various city states . 《漢書·卷九十六下》 original text : 東與匈奴、西北與康居、西與大宛、南與城郭諸國相接。 the royal court of the wusun , the walled city of chigu , was located in a side valley leading to issyk kul . hill ( 2009 ) , '' appendix i : chigu 赤谷 ( royal court of the wusun kunmo ) , '' pp . 527–531 . lying on one of the branches of the silk road chigu was an important trading centre , but its exact location has not been established . the wusun approved of a possible alliance , and zhang qian was sent as ambassador in 115 & nbsp ; bce . according to the agreement the wusun would jointly attack the xiongnu with the han , while they were offered a han princess in marriage and the return of their original gansu homeland ( heqin ) . due to fear of the xiongnu , the wusun however had second thoughts and suggested sending a delegation to the han rather than moving their capital further west . . as han allies . some time after the han-wusun negotiations had ended , the han inflicted several blows to the xiongnu . the han then threatened war upon the wusun , after which liejiaomi finally agreed to an alliance , sending tributary horses and accepting princess xijun as his wife . along with the yuezhi and the kangju of the ferghana valley , the wusun became the main suppliers of horses for the han . the xiongnu had however also sent a princess to marry liejiaomi , and the xiongnu princess was declared his senior consort , with xijun becoming his junior wife . since liejiaomi was already an old man , xijun was however married to his successor cenzou , to which wu agreed . xijun wrote a famous poem , the beichouge , in which she complains about her exile in the land of the '' barbarians '' : gardiner-garden , j.r . , chang-ch'ien and central asian ethnography in : papers of far eastern history 33 ( march 1986 ) p . & nbsp ; 23–79 . ( australian national university institute of advanced studies department of far eastern history ( canberra ) ) , a survey of theories of ethnic affiliations and identification of the wusun and the yuezhi . hill , john e . 2004 . the peoples of the west from the weilue 魏略 by yu huan 魚豢 : a third century chinese account composed between 239 and 265 ce ( sic . ) . draft annotated english translation . weilue : the peoples of the west 陈连开 ( liankai , chen ) ( 1999 ) . 中国民族史纲要 ( outlines on china 's ethnicities ) . beijing : china financial and economic publishing house . stein , aurel m . 1921 . serindia : detailed report of explorations in central asia and westernmost china , 5 vols . london & oxford . clarendon press . reprint : delhi . motilal banarsidass . 1980 . 国立情報学研究所『東洋文庫所蔵』貴重書デジタルアーカイブ - ディジタル・シルクロード・プロジェクト 王明哲 . 王明哲 , 王炳华著 . 王炳华 ( wang mingzhe et al . ) ( 1983 ) . 乌孙硏究 ( research on wusun ) . ürümqi : xinjiang people 's press .