Doxology

trinitarian doxology . among christian traditions a doxology is typically an expression of praise sung to the holy trinity : the father , the son , and the holy spirit . it is common in high hymns for the final stanza to take the form of a doxology . doxologies occur in the eucharistic prayers , the liturgy of the hours , hymns , and various catholic devotions such as novenas and the rosary . gloria in excelsis deo . the gloria in excelsis deo , also called the greater doxology , is a hymn beginning with the words that the angels sang when the birth of christ was announced to shepherds in . other verses were added very early , forming a doxology . gloria patri . the gloria patri , so named for its latin incipit , is commonly used as a doxology by roman catholics , old catholics , independent catholics , orthodox , anglicans , and many protestants including presbyterians , lutherans , methodists , disciples of christ and reformed baptists . it is called the '' lesser doxology '' , thus distinguished from the '' great doxology '' ( gloria in excelsis deo ) , and is often called simply '' the doxology '' . as well as praising god , it was regarded as a short declaration of faith in the equality of the three persons of the holy trinity . the greek text , : δόξα πατρὶ καὶ υἱῷ καὶ ἁγίῳ πνεύματι : καὶ νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων . ἀμήν . is rendered into latin as , : gloria patri , et filio , et spiritui sancto . sicut erat in principio , et nunc , et semper , et in sæcula sæculorum . amen . which is literally translated : glory be to the father , and to the son , and to the holy spirit . : as it was in the beginning , and now , and always , and into the ages of ages . amen . '' in saecula saeculorum '' , here rendered '' ages of ages '' , is the calque of what was probably a semitic idiom , via koine greek , meaning '' forever . '' it is also rendered '' world without end '' in english , an expression also used in james i 's authorised version of the bible in ephesians 3:21 and isaiah 45:17 . similarly , '' et semper '' is often rendered '' and ever shall be '' , thus giving the more metrical english version , : . as it was in the beginning , is now and ever shall be , world without end . amen . a common version of the liturgy of the hours , as approved by the u.s . conference of catholic bishops , uses a newer , different translation for the latin : : glory to the father , and to the son , and to the holy spirit : as it was in the beginning , is now , and will be for ever . amen . the most commonly encountered orthodox english version : : glory to the father , and to the son , and to the holy spirit , both now , and ever , and unto the ages of ages . amen the modern anglican version found in common worship is slightly different , and is rooted in the aforementioned translations found in the authorised version : : glory be to the father and to the son and to the holy ghost ; as it was in the beginning is now and ever shall be , world without end . amen . '' praise god , from whom all blessings flow '' . another doxology in widespread use in english , in some protestant traditions commonly referred to simply as the doxology or the common doxology , the lutheran church-missouri synod—liturgical glossary begins '' praise god , from whom all blessings flow '' . the words are thus : : praise god , from whom all blessings flow ; : praise him , all creatures here below ; : praise him above , ye heavenly host ; : praise father , son , and holy ghost . amen . these words were written in 1674 by thomas ken as the final verse of two hymns , '' awake , my soul , and with the sun '' and '' glory to thee , my god , this night , '' intended for morning and evening worship at winchester college . this final verse , separated from its proper hymns and sung to the tune '' old 100th '' , for an example of this , see praise god , from whom all blessings flow ( mp3 with organ only ) '' duke street '' , '' lasst uns erfreuen '' , '' the eighth tune '' by thomas tallis , among others , frequently marks the dedication of alms or offerings at sunday worship . the popular hawaiian version hoʻonani i ka makua mau was translated by hiram bingham i and is published in hymnals . hoʻonani i ka makua mau at hymnary.org ; hoʻonani i ka makua mau at huapala.org many mennonite congregations sing a longer and more embellished setting of this text known as '' dedication anthem '' by samuel stanley . joseph funk , harmonia sacra , 290 . harmonia sacra attributes stanley as composer , although lowell mason 's the boston handel and haydn society collection of church music does not give a clear attribution . in mennonite circles , this doxology is commonly known as '' 606 '' for its hymn number in the mennonite hymnal 1969 , and colloquially known as the '' mennonite national anthem . '' students at goshen college stand and sing the doxology when 6:06 remains in a soccer game – as long as goshen is winning the game . some christian denominations have adopted altered versions of the doxology in the interest of inclusive language or other considerations . some disciples of christ congregations eliminate the masculine pronouns . some denominations , such as the anglican church of canada ( common praise ) , the united church of canada ( voices united ) , and the united church of christ ( new century hymnal ) , replace '' heavenly host '' with a reference to god 's love . the united church of christ version reads : : praise god from whom all blessings flow ; : praise god , all creatures here below ; : praise god for all that love has done ; : creator , christ , and spirit , one . the presbyterian church ( usa ) accepted this version of the doxology in 2014 to accompany the glory to god , the presbyterian hymnal . this version was written by the rev . neil weatherhogg , pastor of both the first presbyterian church of kerrville , texas and the harvey browne presbyterian church in louisville kentucky . this version was published by rev . weatherhogg in 1990 . this hymn maintains gender neutrality as it does not refer to god in gender specific terminology . it goes : : praise god from whom all blessings flow ; : praise god , all creatures here below ; : praise god above ye heavenly host ; : praise triune god , whom we adore other versions of this doxology exist as well , with various lyrics , including in the united methodist hymnal ( 621 ) , '' be present at our table , lord , '' which is often sung as grace before meals using the tune '' old 100th ; '' hymn by john cennick ; tune from the genevan psalter , 1551 ; attributed to louis bourgeois : : be present at our table , lord ; : be here and everywhere adored ; : thy creatures bless , and grant that we : may feast in paradise with thee . eucharistic doxology . in the catholic mass a prose doxology concludes the canon of the mass , preceding the our father . it is typically sung by the presiding priest along with any concelebration priests . the latin text reads : : per ipsum , et cum ipso , et in ipso , est tibi deo patri omnipotenti in unitate spiritus sancti , omnis honor et gloria per omnia saecula saeculorum . amen . ( 1 . through him , with him , in him , in the unity of the holy spirit , all glory and honor is yours almighty father , forever and ever amen . and 2 . through him , and with him , and in him , o god , almighty father , in the unity of the holy spirit , all glory and honor is yours , forever and ever . amen . ) the equivalent passage in the book of common prayer ( 1549 ) of the church of england reads : : by whom and with whom , in the unity of the holy ghost , all honour and glory be unto thee , o father almighty , world without end . amen . lord 's prayer doxology . another familiar doxology is the one often added at the end of the lord 's prayer : '' for thine is the kingdom , and the power , and the glory , forever and ever , amen . '' this is found in manuscripts representative of the byzantine text of matthew 6:13 , but not in the manuscripts considered by catholics to be the most reliable . according to scrivener 's '' supplement to the authorized english version of new testament '' , it is omitted by eight out of 500 or so manuscripts . some scholars do not consider it part of the original text of matthew , and modern translations do not include it , mentioning it only in footnotes . since 1970 , the doxology , in the form '' for the kingdom , the power , and the glory are yours , now and for ever '' , is used in the roman rite of the mass , after the embolism . the catholic encyclopedia ( 1914 ) claims that this doxology '' appears in the greek textus receptus and has been adopted in the later editions of the book of common prayer , and is undoubtedly an interpolation . '' in fact , the lord 's prayer doxology is often left away by catholics , such as in the liturgy of the hours , or when , which is quite often outside mass , a hail mary follows immediately ( e . & nbsp ; g . in the rosary where the gloria patri serves as doxology ) . according to the catechism of the catholic church , this doxology takes up . derivations . because some christian worship services include a doxology , and these hymns therefore were familiar and well-practiced among church choirs , the english word sockdolager arose , a deformation of doxology , which came to mean a '' show-stopper '' , a production number . the oxford english dictionary considers it a '' fanciful '' coinage , but an 1893 speculation reported in the chicago tribune as to the origin of the word as one of its early attestations : : a writer in the march atlantic gives this as the origin of the slang word '' socdollager '' , which was current some time ago . '' socdollager '' was the uneducated man 's transposition of '' doxologer '' , which was the familiar new england rendering of '' doxology '' . this was the puritan term for the verse ascription used at the conclusion of every hymn , like the '' gloria '' at the end of a chanted psalm . on doctrinal grounds it was proper for the whole congregation to join in the singing , so that it became a triumphant winding up of the whole act of worship . thus is happened that '' socdollager '' became the term for anything which left nothing else to follow ; a decisive , overwhelming finish , to which no reply was possible . 19 march 1893 , chicago daily tribune , pg . 36 . see also . greater doxology . references . external links . hymns of the spirit three contains numerous '' doxologies '' to the tune '' old hundredth '' used in the unitarian , universalist and liberal christian traditions , in english , spanish and french .