Thornhill, West Yorkshire

history . thornhill is mentioned in the domesday book of 1086 as within the ancient wapentake of agbrigg , open domesday online : thornhill ( yorkshire ) while anglian crosses and other remains indicate that there was a settlement here by the 9th century . a hoard of 27 roman denarii found in turnip lane and pottery at the cross indicates substantially earlier settlement . the tombstone of a certain very high-ranking anglian called osberht ( a very rare find ) was found in the graveyard of thornhill parish church . some historians claim that the grave bearing the name osbehrt is that of king osberht , who was killed on 21 march 867 while fighting the viking great heathen army led by ivar the boneless . the gravestone ( among other contemporaneous high-status anglian gravestones ) is on display in the church . the local place-names of ludd well ( shown in a 1602 map ) and the combs indicate celtic settlement . this is reinforced by the dedication of the parish church to st michael , which is typical for churches in high places in formerly celtic parts of northern england . the celtic kingdom of elmet ( covering modern west yorkshire ) collapsed in ad 617 . in 1320 edward ii granted a charter for a market and a fair . in the reign of henry iii , thornhill hall was the seat of the thornhill family , who intermarried with the de fixbys and babthorpes in the reigns of edward i and edward ii . in the reign of edward iii , elizabeth thornhill , the only child of simon thornhill , married sir henry savile . this extinguished the family line of thornhills of thornhill which now passed its property down the savile line . thornhill now became the seat of the powerful savile family . the saviles later intermarried with the calverley family as well , so that when sir john savile died in 1503 in thornhill , he left provision in his will for his sister alice , married to sir william calverley . will of sir john savile , j . w . clay , yorkshire archaeological journal , 1920 sir william savile , the third baronet of the family , fortified the hall . seizure of thornhill hall . the saviles remained here until the english civil war when the house was besieged . as royalist heroine since the siege of sheffield castle in 1644 , lady anne savile 's troops under capt . thomas paulden ( brother of william paulden ) in august 1648 defended thornhill hall against the parliamentary forces under col . sir thomas fairfax . they were forced to surrender and the hall was destroyed . b . nuttall , a history of thornhill , 1970 . the old rectory survived and was home to several prominent vicars , most notably john michell , who first rose to international prominence by developing an understanding of earthquakes , then devised an experiment to accurately determine the mass of planet earth , but perhaps most intriguingly for thornhill , attracted benjamin franklin ( founding father of the usa ) , joseph priestley , jan ingenhousz , john smeaton and others to a scientific meeting and overnight stay in 1771 . benjamin franklin 's stay in thornhill remained unknown until 2015 . some ruins of the house and the moat still remain at thornhill rectory park . the moat still retains water . monuments to members of the thornhill and savile families are in thornhill parish church . . industrial revolution . thornhill has close ties to coal mining . the demand for coal increased due to the development of the steam engine . the local population increased as more workers were recruited for the mines . in 1893 a mining disaster at combs pit killed 139 coal miners . thornhill colliery resulted from the merging of inghams and combs collieries in 1948 but closed in 1971 . governance . historically thornhill ( st . michael ) was a large ecclesiastical parish in the wapentake of agbrigg , west riding of yorkshire which joined the dewsbury poor law union in 1837 . in 1894 it was an urban district and in 1910 it was incorporated into dewsbury county borough . . geography . thornhill is situated on a hill on the south side of the river calder and the calder and hebble navigation . the township covered and the underlying rock comprises coal measures . thornhill encompasses the areas of thornhill edge , overthorpe and fox royd overlooking the valleys of the howroyd beck and smithy brook . . schools . the thornhill area has two junior schools : overthorpe ( c of e ) junior and infants and thornhill junior and infants school . thornhill community academy is the area 's secondary school , with a gcse pass rate of 84 % in 2010 , an increase of 22 percentage points from 2009 . recently the school has undergone various modifications , and is now a science college . much of the school has been refurbished and modernised . construction of a new sports hall was completed in april 2007 and includes a new multi-use games area ( muga ) . pubs . thornhill has several public houses . the small black horse is in the south . the scarborough is a medium-sized traditional public house on the edge of frank lane . the flatt top is a small public house on the corner of albion road that serves traditionally-brewed local ales . next to the church is the savile arms , which serves a range of traditionally-brewed real ales and regular guest ales . the alma is closed and was the north of thornhill . there are also several working men 's clubs . sports . thornhill is home to the thornhill trojans a rugby league team who are currently in the national conference league premier division . the area also boasts several football teams overthorpe sports who play in the west riding county amateur league ( premier division ) on saturdays and overthorpe town who play in the heavy woollen sunday league ( first division ) . the club has recently been awarded fa charter standard status as an adult club and has ambitious plans to increase participation in the game in the next three years . thornhill united is located at rectory park . there are several rugby league youth teams . the thornhill rugby club , located in overthorpe park , houses the changing rooms for the local rugby and football teams . community facilities open to the public include a football pitch , rugby pitch and basketball court , a mini rugby pitch frequently used by the rugby club itself for the under tens junior team and the new sports hall , with the multi-use games area located at the local secondary school ( the community science college at thornhill ) . thornhill is home to the savile bowmen , an archery club that shoots at thornhill cricket and bowls club . three tennis courts are situated next to thornhill cricket and bowls club . this is home to thornhill tennis club which currently have two teams in the huddersfield and district tennis league . amenities . there are a number of local shops and off-licences in thornhill and numerous takeaways ranging from traditional english to italian cuisine . the nearest large supermarkets are in dewsbury , which is connected by public transport . the area has two post offices with limited services . overthorpe post office has recently undergone building work and is now part of the onestop franchise . other shops and services include a florist , dental surgery , beauty salon , a computer repair shop , a tattoo studio , a fish and chip shop and a couple of indian takeaways . survey of english dialects site . the area was also covered by the survey of english dialects owing to the belief that it was a hotbed of yorkshire dialect . a 2005 study compared the 1964 thornhill recording with a recording from nearby ossett in 1999 . . church protests . in 2014 there were protests after items were removed from gravestones at thornhill parish church , under the orders of the diocese of west yorkshire and the dales . . notable people . john rudd , cartographer , was also a rector of thornhill christopher saxton , cartographer and apprentice to john rudd lived in thornhill sir george radcliffe , politician and lawyer was born in thornhill sir william savile , 3rd baronet , politician and soldier was born in thornhill george savile , 1st marquess of halifax , statesman and writer was born in thornhill john michell , geologist and astronomer , was also a rector of thornhill sir francis sykes , 1st baronet , east india company '' nabob '' and politician was born in thornhill john baines , mathematician taught at thornhill grammar school barron kilner , rugby union international and a mayor of wakefield was born in thornhill hector munro chadwick , philologist and historian was born in thornhill . see also . listed buildings in dewsbury . references . external links .