Claddagh ring

description . the claddagh ring belongs to a group of european finger rings called fede ring . scarisbrick and henig , finger rings , oxford : ashmolean museum , 2003 the name '' fede '' derives from the italian phrase ( '' hands joined in faith '' or '' hands joined in loyalty '' ) . these rings date from roman times , when the gesture of clasped hands was a symbol of pledging vows , and they were used as engagement/wedding rings in medieval and renaissance europe . fede rings are distinctive in that the bezel is cut or cast to form two clasped hands that symbolize engagement . john aubrey , miscellanies , london , 1696 : '' i have seen some rings made for sweet-hearts , with a heart enamelled held between two right hands . '' the claddagh ring is a variation on the fede ring , while the hands , heart , and crown motif was used in england in the early 18th century . enamelled gold fede ring , set with rose-cut diamonds in silver collets , with a crowned heart held by two hands inscribed '' dudley & katherine united 26.mar . 1706 '' — victoria and albert museum towards the end of the 20th century there was an explosion of interest in the claddagh ring , both as jewelry and as an icon of irish heritage . in recent years it has been embellished with interlace designs and combined with other celtic and irish symbols , but this is a very recent phenomenon that corresponds with the worldwide expansion in popularity of the claddagh ring as an emblem of irish identity . stephen walker ( 2013 ) the modern history of celtic jewellery : 1840-1980 , walker metalsmiths . . origins . galway has produced claddagh rings continuously since at least 1700 , but the name '' claddagh ring '' was not used before the 1830s . a freely available but incomplete copy of delamer 's article , the claddagh ring ( 1996 ) , without pictures . pearsall , judy ed . ( 2004 ) '' claddagh ring '' in the concise oxford dictionary , oxford university press . although there are various myths and legends around the origin of the claddagh ring , it is almost certain that it originated in or close to the small fishing village of claddagh in galway . as an example of a maker , bartholomew fallon was a 17th-century irish goldsmith , based in galway , who made claddagh rings until circa 1700 . his name first appears in the will of one dominick martin , also a jeweller , dated 26 january 1676 , in which martin willed fallon some of his tools . fallon continued working as a goldsmith until 1700 . his are among the oldest surviving examples of the claddagh ring , in many cases bearing his signature . adrian james martyn . ( 2001 ) the tribes of galway , p . & nbsp ; 60 . there are many legends about the origins of the ring , particularly concerning richard joyce , a silversmith from galway circa 1700 , who is said to have invented the claddagh design as we know it . george quinn . ( 1970 ) the claddagh ring , the mantle , 13:9–13 . legend has it that joyce was captured and enslaved by algerian corsairs around 1675 while on a passage to the west indies ; he was sold into slavery to a moorish goldsmith who taught him the craft . king william iii sent an ambassador to algeria to demand the release of any and all british subjects who were enslaved in that country , which at the time would have included richard joyce . after fourteen years , joyce was released and returned to galway and brought along with him the ring he had fashioned while in captivity : what we 've come to know as the claddagh . he gave the ring to his sweetheart , married , and became a goldsmith with '' considerable success '' . james hardiman ( 1820 ) , the history of the town and county of the town of galway , his initials are in one of the earliest surviving claddagh rings , but there are three other rings also made around that time , bearing the mark of goldsmith thomas meade . the victorian antiquarian sir william jones described the claddagh , and gives chambers ' book of days robert chambers . ( 1863 ) book of days : a miscellany of popular antiquities . as the source , in his book finger ring lore . jones says : an account written in 1906 by william dillon , a galway jeweller , claimed that the '' claddagh '' ring was worn in the aran isles , connemara and beyond . william dillon . ( 1906 ) journal of the galway archaeological and historical society , 5 . knowledge of the ring and its customs spread within ireland and britain during the victorian period , and this is when its name became established . galway jewellers began to market it beyond the local area in the 19th century . further recognition came in the 20th century . in his 1911 book rings for the finger , american mineralogist george frederick kunz addresses the importance of gold wedding rings in ireland but does not mention the claddagh ring . he does , however , include a photo of one , captioned with its correct name . furthermore , it is unclear exactly how or when the ring was brought to the united states . usage and symbolism . the claddagh 's distinctive design features two hands clasping a heart and usually surmounted by a crown . these elements symbolize the qualities of love ( the heart ) , friendship ( the hands ) , and loyalty ( the crown ) . a '' fenian '' claddagh ring , without a crown , is a slightly different take on the design but has not achieved the level of popularity of the crowned version . claddagh rings are relatively popular among the irish and those of irish heritage , such as irish americans , paddy sammon . ( 2002 ) greenspeak : ireland in her own words , town house press , dublin , ireland . as cultural symbols and as friendship , engagement and wedding rings . while claddagh rings are sometimes used as friendship rings , they are most commonly used as engagement and wedding rings . mothers sometimes give these rings to their daughters when they come of age . there are several mottos and wishes associated with the ring , such as : '' let love and friendship reign . '' jo o'donoghue and sean mcmahon ( 2004 ) brewer 's dictionary of irish phrase and fable in ireland , the united states , canada , and other parts of the irish diaspora , the claddagh is sometimes handed down mother-to-eldest daughter or grandmother-to-granddaughter . patricia mcadoo . ( 2005 ) claddagh : the tale of the ring : a galway tale , galway online . according to irish author colin murphy , a claddagh ring was worn with the intention of conveying the wearer 's relationship status : on the right hand with the point of the heart toward the fingertips : the wearer is single and might be looking for love . on the right hand with the point of the heart toward the wrist : the wearer is in a relationship ; someone '' has captured their heart '' on the left ring finger with the point of the heart toward the fingertips : the wearer is engaged . on the left ring finger with the point of the heart toward the wrist : the wearer is married . colin murphy and donal o'dea . ( 2006 ) the feckin ' book of everything irish , barnes & nobles , new york , ny , p . 126 . there are other localized variations and oral traditions , in both ireland and the irish diaspora , involving the hand and the finger on which the claddagh is worn . folklore about the ring is relatively recent , not ancient , with '' very little native irish writing about the ring '' , hence , the difficulty today in finding any scholarly or non-commercial source that explains the traditional ways of wearing the ring . seán mcmahon . ( 2005 ) story of the claddagh ring , mercier press , cork , ireland . . see also . ecclesiastical ring engagement ring luckenbooth brooch pre-engagement ring wedding ring . references . external links . 18th century claddagh ring – victoria and albert museum