Pomeranian dog

appearance . pomeranians are small dogs weighing and standing high at the withers . they are compact but sturdy dogs with an abundant textured coat with a highly plumed tail set high and flat . the top coat forms a ruff of fur on the neck , which poms are well known for , and they also have a fringe of feathery hair on the hindquarters . the earliest examples of the breed were white or occasionally brown or black . queen victoria adopted a small red pomeranian in 1888 , which caused that color to become fashionable by the end of the 19th century . in modern times , the pomeranian comes in the widest variety of colors of any dog breed , including white , black , brown , red , orange , cream , blue , sable , black and tan , brown and tan , spotted , brindle , and parti , plus combinations of those colors . the most common colors are orange , black , or cream/white . the merle pomeranian is a recent colour developed by breeders . it is a combination of a solid base colour with a lighter blue/grey patch which gives a mottled effect . the most common base colours for the effect are red/brown or black , although it can also appear with other colours . combinations such as brindle merle or liver merle are not accepted in the breed standard . in addition , the eye , nose and paw pad are marshmallow color , changing parts of the eye to blue and the color on the nose and paw pads to become mottled pink and black . pomeranians have a thick , double coat . while grooming is not difficult , breeders recommend that it be done daily to maintain the quality of the coat and because of its thickness and the constant shedding , with trimming every 1–2 months . the outer coat is long , straight , and harsh in texture while the undercoat is soft , thick and short . the coat knots and tangles easily , particularly when the undercoat is being shed , which happens twice a year . file : pomeranian thank you.jpg cream-colored pomeranian file : pomeranian orange sable 600.jpg orange sable pomeranian file : tri-colored-pom-fuzzybutt.jpg tri-colored pomeranian file : pipin pomeranian.jpg a white pomeranian file : pomeranian orange-sable coco.jpg red sable pomeranian file : pomeranianhenna.jpg full-grown pomeranian file : pomeranian puppy.jpg black pomeranian puppy file : pomeranian.jpg black pomeranian file : pomeranian-tb2.jpg toy sized pomeranian . behavior . pomeranians are typically friendly , lively and playful . they can be aggressive with other dogs and humans to try to prove themselves . pomeranians are alert and aware of changes in their environment , and barking at new stimuli can develop into a habit of barking excessively in any situation . they are somewhat defensive of their territory and thus may bark when they hear outside noises . pomeranians are intelligent , respond well to training , and can be very successful in getting what they want from their owners . they are extroverted and enjoy being the center of attention , but they can become dominant , willful and stubborn if not well trained and socialized . the use of toys can be an effective tool in training pomeranians to spend time alone . health . the life expectancy of a pomeranian is 12 to 16 years . a well-bred dog on a good diet with appropriate exercise will have few health problems ; and , if kept trim and fit , a pomeranian is a sturdy dog . the breed does have similar health issues to many dog breeds , although some issues such as hip dysplasia are uncommon because of the pomeranian 's lightweight build . some health issues can develop as a result of lack of attention to grooming and teeth- , ear- , and eye-cleaning . with routine care , these problems can be avoided . they are prone to early tooth loss , and dry food is recommended . poms are one of the breeds with the smallest average litter size , with various sources giving numbers of between 1.9 and 2.7 puppies per litter . . common problems . merle colored dogs may have mild to severe deafness , blindness , increased intraocular pressure , ametropia , microphthalmia , and colobomas . merle dogs born from parents who are also both merles may additionally have abnormalities of the skeletal , cardiac and reproductive systems . luxating patella is another health issue in the pomeranian breed . it occurs when , through either malformation or trauma , the ridges forming the patellar groove in the knee are not prominent and are too shallow to allow the patella to properly sit securely . this can cause the patella to '' luxate '' ( jump out of the groove ) sideways which will cause the leg to lock up with the foot off the ground . while the muscles are contracted the patella can not return to the correct position . the initial pain is caused by the knee cap sliding across the ridges of the femur . once out of position , the dog does not feel any pain caused by the slipped disc . tracheal collapse is caused by a weakening of the tracheal rings in the windpipe . it occurs when the rings that normally hold the shape of the windpipe collapse , closing the airway . the symptoms of a collapse include a honking cough that can sound similar to a goose honk , an intolerance to exercise , fainting spells and a cough that is worsened by hot weather , exercise and excitement . the tendency for episodes of tracheal collapse typically increases in frequency and severity as the dog ages . in pomeranians , a condition often called '' black skin disease '' occurs which is a combination of alopecia ( hair loss ) and hyperpigmentation ( a darkening of the skin ) . other names for this condition include woolly coat , coat funk , pseudo-cushing 's disease , or severe hair loss syndrome . this condition affects male pomeranians more than females , and may be inherited . although most affected dogs show signs following puberty , it can occur at any age . other conditions can mimic this condition including cushing 's syndrome , hypothyroidism , chronic skin infections , and reproductive hormone disorders . another common disorder in male pomeranians is cryptorchidism . this is when either one or both of the testicles do not descend into the scrotum . it is treated through surgical removal of the retained testicle . . exercise . the pomeranian is a small but energetic breed of dog . although pomeranians benefit from frequent attention , they need relatively little exercise : it is recommended to take them on several daily walks and let them run around an enclosed space . '' pomeranian care : energy and exercise '' , american kennel club , 2016 . history . origins . the pomeranian is considered to be descended from the german spitz . the breed is thought to have acquired its name by association with the area known as pomerania which is located in northern poland and germany along the baltic sea . although not the origin of the breed , this area is credited with the breeding which led to the original pomeranian type of dog . proper documentation was lacking until the breed 's introduction into the united kingdom . an early modern recorded reference to the pomeranian breed is from 2 november 1764 , in a diary entry in james boswell 's boswell on the grand tour : germany and switzerland . '' the frenchman had a pomeranian dog named pomer whom he was mighty fond of . '' the offspring of a pomeranian and a wolf bred by an animal merchant from london is discussed in thomas pennant 's a tour in scotland from 1769 . two members of the british royal family influenced the evolution of the breed . in 1767 , queen charlotte , queen-consort of king george iii of great britain , brought two pomeranians to england . named phoebe and mercury , the dogs were depicted in paintings by sir thomas gainsborough . these paintings depicted a dog larger than the modern breed , reportedly weighing as much as , but showing modern traits such as the heavy coat , ears and a tail curled over the back . queen victoria , queen charlotte 's granddaughter , was also an enthusiast and established a large breeding kennel . one of her favoured dogs was a comparatively small red sable pomeranian which she possibly named '' windsor 's marco '' and was reported to weigh only . when she first exhibited marco in 1891 , it caused the smaller-type pomeranian to become immediately popular and breeders began selecting only the smaller specimens for breeding . during her lifetime , the size of the pomeranian breed was reported to have decreased by 50 % . queen victoria worked to improve and promote the pomeranian breed by importing smaller pomeranians of different colours from various european countries to add to her breeding program . royal owners during this period also included joséphine de beauharnais , the wife of napoleon i of france , and king george iv of the united kingdom . the first breed club was set up in england in 1891 , and the first breed standard was written shortly afterwards . the first member of the breed was registered in the united states to the american kennel club in 1898 , and it was recognized in 1900 . in 1912 , two pomeranians were among only three dogs to survive the sinking of rms titanic . a pomeranian called '' lady '' , owned by miss margaret hays , escaped with her owner in lifeboat number seven , while elizabeth barrett rothschild took her pet to safety with her in lifeboat number six . glen rose flashaway won the toy group at the westminster kennel club dog show in 1926 , the first pomeranian to win a group at westminster . it would take until 1988 for the first pomeranian , '' great elms prince charming ii '' , to win the best in show prize from the westminster kennel club . in the standard published in 1998 , the pomeranian is included in the german spitz standard , along with the keeshond , by the fédération cynologique internationale . according to the standard '' spitz breeds are captivating '' and have a '' unique characteristic , cheeky appearance . '' . popularity . the pomeranian has been among the more popular dog breeds in the united states , featuring consistently in the top 20 of registered american kennel club dog breeds since at least 1998 , when it was ranked 10 ; the breed was 17 in the 2011 rankings , dropping two spots from the previous year . in 2012 and 2013 it remained in the top twenty and was ranked at 19 . in 2015 , the breed fell to 21 , falling further to 22 in both 2016 and 2017 . it is not listed in the top 20 breeds in the uk in either 2007 or 2008 . in australia their popularity has declined since 1986 , with a peak of 1,128 pomeranians registered with the australian national kennel council in 1987 ; only 577 were registered in 2008 . however , this is an increase from 2004 , when only 491 dogs were registered . it is recognised that the common pomeranian is listed as the 27th most intelligent dog with the german shepherd sitting at no 1 . it is more popular in american cities in 2008 , ranking joint tenth ( with american bulldog ) in detroit and orlando , ninth in los angeles , a joint seventh in seattle ( again , with the american bulldog ) , but third in honolulu , only bested by the labrador retriever and the german shepherd .