Chicory

names . common chicory is also known as blue daisy , blue dandelion , blue sailors , blue weed , bunk , coffeeweed , cornflower , hendibeh , horseweed , ragged sailors , succory , wild bachelor 's buttons , and wild endive ( note : '' cornflower '' is commonly applied to cornflower ) . common names for varieties of var . foliosum include endive , radicchio , radichetta , belgian endive , french endive , red endive , sugarloaf , and witloof ( or witlof ) . description . when flowering , chicory has a tough , grooved , and more or less hairy stem . it can grow to tall . the leaves are stalked , lanceolate and unlobed ; they range from in length and wide . the flower heads are wide , and usually light purple or lavender ; it has also been described as light blue , and rarely white or pink . of the two rows of involucral bracts , the inner is longer and erect , the outer is shorter and spreading . it flowers from july until october . culinary uses . root chicory . root chicory ( cichorium intybus var . sativum ) has long been cultivated in europe as a coffee substitute . the roots are baked , roasted , ground , and used as an additive , especially in the mediterranean region ( where the plant is native ) . as a coffee additive , it is also mixed in indian filter coffee , and in parts of southeast asia , south africa , and the southern united states , particularly in new orleans . in france a mixture of 60 % chicory and 40 % coffee is sold as ricoré . it has been more widely used during economic crises such as the great depression in the 1930s and during world war ii in continental europe . chicory , with sugar beet and rye , was used as an ingredient of the east german mischkaffee ( mixed coffee ) , introduced during the '' east german coffee crisis '' of 1976–79 . it is also added to coffee in spain , greek , turkey , syrian , lebanon and palestinian cuisines . some beer brewers use roasted chicory to add flavor to stouts ( commonly expected to have a coffee-like flavor ) . others have added it to strong blond belgian-style ales , to augment the hops , making a witlofbier , from the dutch name for the plant . the roots can also be cooked like parsnips . . leaf chicory . . wild . while edible raw , wild chicory leaves usually have a bitter taste , especially the older leaves . the flavor is appreciated in certain cuisines , such as in the ligurian and apulian regions of italy and also in the southern part of india . in ligurian cuisine , wild chicory leaves are an ingredient of preboggion and in greek cuisine of horta ; in the apulian region , wild chicory leaves are combined with fava bean puree in the traditional local dish fave e cicorie selvatiche . in albania , the leaves are used as a spinach substitute , mainly served simmered and marinated in olive oil , or as ingredient for fillings of byrek . by cooking and discarding the water , the bitterness is reduced , after which the chicory leaves may be sautéed with garlic , anchovies , and other ingredients . in this form , the resulting greens might be combined with pasta or accompany meat dishes . jaume fàbrega , el gust d'un poble : els plats més famosos de la cuina catalana . llomillo fregit amb xicoires . cultivated . chicory may be cultivated for its leaves , usually eaten raw as salad leaves . cultivated chicory is generally divided into three types , of which there are many varieties : radicchio usually has variegated red or red and green leaves . some only refer to the white-veined red-leaved type as radicchio , also known as red endive and red chicory . it has a bitter and spicy taste , which mellows when it is grilled or roasted . it can also be used to add color and zest to salads . it is largely used in italy in different varieties , the most famous being the ones from treviso ( known as radicchio rosso di treviso ) , from verona ( radicchio di verona ) , and chioggia ( radicchio di chioggia ) , which are classified as an igp . it is also common in greece , where it is known as radiki and mainly boiled in salads , and can be used in pies . belgian endive is known in dutch as witloof or witlof ( '' white leaf '' ) , and also as witloof in the united states , indivia in italy , endivias in spain , chicory in the uk , as witlof in australia , endive in france , and chicon in parts of northern france , in wallonia and ( in french ) in luxembourg . it has a small head of cream-colored , bitter leaves . the harvested root is allowed to sprout indoors in the absence of sunlight , which prevents the leaves from turning green and opening up ( etiolation ) . it is often sold wrapped in blue paper to protect it from light , so to preserve its pale color and delicate flavor . the smooth , creamy white leaves may be served stuffed , baked , boiled , cut and cooked in a milk sauce , or simply cut raw . the tender leaves are slightly bitter ; the whiter the leaf , the less bitter the taste . the harder inner part of the stem at the bottom of the head can be cut out before cooking to prevent bitterness . belgium exports chicon/witloof to over 40 countries . the technique for growing blanched endives was accidentally discovered in the 1850s at the botanical garden of brussels in saint-josse-ten-noode , belgium . today france is the largest producer of endive . puntarelle ( cichorium intybus var . foliosum ) , also known as puntarelle , includes a whole subfamily ( some varieties from belgian endive and some from radicchio ) of chicory and is used throughout italy . although leaf chicory is often called '' endive '' , true endive ( cichorium endivia ) is a different species in the genus , distinct from belgian endive . chicory root and inulin . around 1970 , it was found that the root contains up to 20 % inulin , a polysaccharide similar to starch . inulin is mainly found in the plant family asteraceae as a storage carbohydrate ( for example jerusalem artichoke , dahlia , yacon , etc . ) . it is used as a sweetener in the food industry with a sweetening power 10 % that of sucrose and is sometimes added to yogurts as a 'prebiotic' . madrigal l . sangronis e . '' inulin and derivates as key ingredients in functional foods . review '' spanish archivos latinoamericanos de nutricion . 57 ( 4 ) :387-96 , 2007 dec . fresh chicory root may contain between 13 and 23 % inulin , by total weight . . nutrition . raw chicory leaves are 92 % water , 5 % carbohydrates , 2 % protein , and contain negligible fat ( table ) . in a 100 gram reference amount , raw chicory leaves provide 23 calories and significant amounts ( more than 20 % of the daily value ) of vitamin k , vitamin a , vitamin c , some b vitamins , and manganese . vitamin e and calcium are present in moderate amounts . raw endive is 94 % water and has low nutrient content . agents responsible for bitterness . the bitter substances are primarily the two sesquiterpene lactones , lactucin and lactucopicrin . other ingredients are aesculetin , aesculin , cichoriin , umbelliferone , scopoletin , 6,7-dihydrocoumarin , and further sesquiterpene lactones and their glycosides . harsh pal bais , ga ravishankar ( 2001 ) cichorium intybus l – cultivation , processing , utility , value addition and biotechnology , with an emphasis on current status and future prospects . journal of the science of food and agriculture , 81 , 467-484 ( online ) . traditional medicine . chicory root contains essential oils similar to those found in plants in the related genus tanacetum . edible and medicinal plants of the west , gregory l . tilford , in traditional medicine , chicory has been listed as one of the 38 plants used to prepare bach flower remedies . . forage . chicory is highly digestible for ruminants and has a low fiber concentration . chicory roots are an '' excellent substitute for oats '' for horses due to their protein and fat content . chicory contains a low quantity of reduced tannins that may increase protein utilization efficiency in ruminants . some tannins reduce intestinal parasites . dietary chicory may be toxic to internal parasites , with studies of ingesting chicory by livestocks having lower worm burdens , leading to its use as a forage supplement . although chicory might have originated in france , italy , and india , much development of chicory for use with livestock has taken place in new zealand . . forage chicory varieties . 'puna ' ( 'grasslands puna ' ) : developed in new zealand , gene logsdon donald l . sparks ( editor ) grasslands puna is well adapted to different climates , being grown from alberta , canada , new mexico , florida to australia . donald l . sparks ( editor ) it is resistant to bolting , which leads to high nutrient levels in the leaves in spring . it also has high resistance to grazing . 'forage feast ' ashton acton ( editor ) : a variety from france used for human consumption and also for wildlife plots , where animals such as deer might graze . it is resistant to bolting . kenneth j . moore , michael collins , c . jerry nelson and daren d . redfearn ( editors ) it is very cold-hardy , and being lower in tannins than other forage varieties , is suitable for human consumption . 'choice' : choice has been bred for high winter and early-spring growth activity , and lower amounts of lactucin and lactone , which are believed to taint milk . it is also use for seeding deer wildlife plots . 'oasis ' peter j . fiduccia : oasis was bred for increased lactone rates for the forage industry , and for higher resistance to fungal diseases such as sclerotinia ( mainly s . minor and s . sclerotiorum . steven t . koike , peter gladders and albert paulus ) 'puna ii' : this variety is more winter-active than most others , which leads to greater persistence and longevity . 'grouse ' : a new zealand variety , it is used as a planting companion for forage brassicas . more prone to early flowering than other varieties , it has higher crowns more susceptible to overbrowsing . 'six point' : a united states variety , winter hardy and resistant to bolting . it is very similar to puna . others varieties known include ; 'chico ' , 'ceres grouse ' , 'good hunt ' , 'el nino ' and 'lacerta' . . history . chicory is native to western asia , north africa , and europe . the plant has a history reaching back to ancient egypt . in ancient rome , a dish called puntarelle was made with chicory sprouts . it was mentioned by horace in reference to his own diet , which he describes as very simple : '' me pascunt olivae , me cichorea , me malvae '' ( '' as for me , olives , endives , and mallows provide sustenance '' ) . horace , odes 31 , ver 15 , ca 30 bc chicory was first described as a cultivated plant in the 17th century . when coffee was introduced to europe , the dutch thought that chicory made a lively addition to the bean drink . in 1766 , frederick the great banned the importation of coffee into prussia , leading to the development of a coffee substitute by brunswick innkeeper christian gottlieb förster ( died 1801 ) , who gained a concession in 1769/70 to manufacture it in brunswick and berlin . by 1795 , 22 to 24 factories of this type were in brunswick . lord monboddo describes the plant in 1779 letter from monboddo to john hope , 29 april 1779 ; reprinted by william knight 1900 as the '' chicoree '' , which the french cultivated as a pot herb . in napoleonic era france , chicory frequently appeared as an adulterant in coffee , or as a coffee substitute . chicory was also adopted as a coffee substitute by confederate soldiers during the american civil war , and has become common in the united states . it was also used in the united kingdom during the world war ii , where camp coffee , a coffee and chicory essence , has been on sale since 1885 . in the united states , chicory root has long been used as a substitute for coffee in prisons . ( a ) delaney , john h . '' new york ( state ) . dept . of efficiency and economy annual report '' . albany new york , 1915 , p . 673 . accessed via google books . ( b ) '' prison talk '' website ; kentucky section : . by the 1840s , the port of new orleans was the second-largest importer of coffee ( after new york ) . louisianans began to add chicory root to their coffee when union navy blockades during the american civil war cut off the port of new orleans , thereby creating a long-standing tradition . chicory is also mentioned in certain sericulture texts . the primary caretaker of the silkworms , the '' silkworm mother '' , should not eat or even touch it . the chicory flower is often seen as inspiration for the romantic concept of the blue flower ( e.g . in german language blauwarte ≈ blue lookout by the wayside ) . it could open locked doors , according to european folklore . howard , michael . traditional folk remedies ( century , 1987 ) , p.120 . . gallery . file : dried chicory root.jpg dried chicory root file : chicory tea.jpg korean chicory tea made from dried chicory root . see also . inulin prebiotic ( nutrition ) coffee substitute sugar substitute