James Chadwick

liverpool . with the onset of the great depression in the united kingdom , the government became more parsimonious with funding for science . at the same time , lawrence 's recent invention , the cyclotron , promised to revolutionise experimental nuclear physics , and chadwick felt that the cavendish laboratory would fall behind unless it also acquired one . he therefore chafed under rutherford , who clung to the belief that good nuclear physics could still be done without large , expensive equipment , and turned down the request for a cyclotron . chadwick was himself a critic of big science in general , and lawrence in particular , whose approach he considered careless and focused on technology at the expense of science . when lawrence postulated the existence of a new and hitherto unknown particle that he claimed was a possible source of limitless energy at the solvay conference in 1933 , chadwick responded that the results were more likely attributable to contamination of the equipment . while lawrence rechecked his results at berkeley only to find that chadwick was correct , rutherford and oliphant conducted an investigation at the cavendish that found that deuterium fuses to form helium-3 , thereby causing the effect that the lawrence had observed . this was another major discovery , but the oliphant-rutherford particle accelerator was an expensive state-of-the-art piece of equipment . in march 1935 , chadwick received an offer of the lyon jones chair of physics at the university of liverpool , in his wife 's home town , to succeed lionel wilberforce . the laboratory was so antiquated that it still ran on direct current electricity , but chadwick seized the opportunity , assuming the chair on 1 october 1935 . the university 's prestige was soon bolstered by chadwick 's nobel prize , which was announced in november 1935 . his medal was sold at auction in 2014 for 329,000 . chadwick set about acquiring a cyclotron for liverpool . he started by spending £700 to refurbish the antiquated laboratories at liverpool , so some components could be made in-house . he was able to persuade the university to provide £2,000 and obtained a grant for another £2,000 from the royal society . to build his cyclotron , chadwick brought in two young experts , bernard kinsey and harold walke , who had worked with lawrence at the university of california . a local cable manufacturer donated the copper conductor for the coils . the cyclotron 's 50-ton magnet was manufactured in trafford park by metropolitan-vickers , which also made the vacuum chamber . the cyclotron was completely installed and running in july 1939 . the total cost of £5,184 was more than chadwick had received from the university and the royal society , so chadwick paid the rest from his ( £8,243 ) nobel prize money . at liverpool the medicine and science faculties worked together closely . chadwick was automatically a committee member of both faculties , and in 1938 he was appointed to a commission headed by lord derby to investigate the arrangements for cancer treatment in liverpool . chadwick anticipated that neutrons and radioactive isotopes produced with the 37-inch cyclotron could be used to study biochemical processes , and might become a weapon in the fight against cancer . second world war . tube alloys and the maud report . in germany , otto hahn and fritz strassmann bombarded uranium with neutrons , and noted that barium , a lighter element , was among the products produced . hitherto , only the same or heavier elements had been produced by the process . in january 1939 , meitner and her nephew otto frisch astounded the physics community with a paper that explained this result . they theorised that uranium atoms bombarded with neutrons can break into two roughly equal fragments , a process they called fission . they calculated that this would result in the release of about 200 mev , implying an energy release orders of magnitude greater than chemical reactions , and frisch confirmed their theory experimentally . it was soon noted by hahn that if neutrons were released during fission , then a chain reaction was possible . french scientists , pierre joliot , hans von halban and lew kowarski , soon verified that more than one neutron was indeed emitted per fission . in a paper co-authored with the american physicist john wheeler , bohr theorised that fission was more likely to occur in the uranium-235 isotope , which made up only 0.7 percent of natural uranium . chadwick did not believe that there was any likelihood of another war with germany in 1939 , and took his family for a holiday on a remote lake in northern sweden . the news of the outbreak of the second world war therefore came as a shock . determined not to spend another war in an internment camp , chadwick made his way to stockholm as fast as he could , but when he arrived there with his family , he found that all air traffic between stockholm and london had been suspended . they made their way back to england on a tramp steamer . when he reached liverpool , chadwick found joseph rotblat , a polish post-doctoral fellow who had come to work with the cyclotron , was now destitute , as he was cut off from funds from poland . chadwick promptly hired rotblat as a lecturer , despite his poor grasp of english . in october 1939 , chadwick received a letter from sir edward appleton , the secretary of the department of scientific and industrial research , asking for his opinion on the feasibility of an atomic bomb . chadwick responded cautiously . he did not dismiss the possibility , but carefully went over the many theoretical and practical difficulties involved . chadwick decided to investigate the properties of uranium oxide further with rotblat . in march 1940 , otto frisch and rudolf peierls at the university of birmingham re-examined the theoretical issues involved in a paper that became known as the frisch–peierls memorandum . instead of looking at unenriched uranium oxide , they considered what would happen to a sphere of pure uranium-235 , and found that not only could a chain reaction occur , but that it might require as little as of uranium-235 , and unleash the energy of tons of dynamite . a special subcommittee of the committee for the scientific survey of air warfare ( cssaw ) , known as the maud committee , was created to investigate the matter further . it was chaired by sir george thomson and its original membership included chadwick , along with mark oliphant , john cockcroft and philip moon . while other teams investigated uranium enrichment techniques , chadwick 's team at liverpool concentrated on determining the nuclear cross section of uranium-235 . by april 1941 , it had been experimentally confirmed that the critical mass of uranium-235 might be or less . his research into such matters was complicated by all-but-incessant luftwaffe bombings of the environs of his liverpool lab ; the windows were blown out so often that they were replaced by cardboard . in july 1941 , chadwick was chosen to write the final draft of the maud report , which , when presented by vannevar bush to president franklin d . roosevelt in october 1941 , inspired the u.s . government to pour millions of dollars into the pursuit of an atomic bomb . when george b . pegram and harold urey visited britain to see how the project , now known as tube alloys , was going , chadwick was able to tell them : '' i wish i could tell you that the bomb is not going to work , but i am 90 per cent sure that it will . '' in a recent book about the bomb project , graham farmelo wrote that '' chadwick did more than any other scientist to give churchill the bomb . & nbsp ; . chadwick was tested almost to the breaking point . '' so worried that he could not sleep , chadwick resorted to sleeping pills , which he continued to take for most of his remaining years . chadwick later said that he realised that '' a nuclear bomb was not only possible—it was inevitable . sooner or later these ideas could not be peculiar to us . everybody would think about them before long , and some country would put them into action '' . sir hermann bondi suggested that it was fortunate that chadwick , not rutherford , was the doyen of uk physics at the time , as the latter 's prestige might otherwise have overpowered chadwick 's interest in '' looking forward '' to the bomb 's prospects . manhattan project . owing to the danger from aerial bombardment , the chadwicks sent their twins to canada as part of a government evacuation scheme . chadwick was reluctant to move tube alloys there , believing that the united kingdom was a better location for the isotope separation plant . the enormous scope of the effort became more apparent in 1942 : even a pilot separation plant would cost over £1 million and strain britain 's resources , to say nothing of a full-scale plant , which was estimated to cost somewhere in the vicinity of £25 million . it would have to be built in america . at the same time that the british became convinced that a joint project was necessary , the progress of the american manhattan project was such that british cooperation seemed less essential , although the americans were still eager to utilise chadwick 's talents . the matter of cooperation had to be taken up at the highest level . in september 1943 , the prime minister , winston churchill , and president roosevelt negotiated the quebec agreement , which reinstated cooperation between britain , the united states and canada . chadwick , oliphant , peierls and simon were summoned to the united states by the director of tube alloys , sir wallace akers , to work with the manhattan project . the quebec agreement established a new combined policy committee to direct the joint project . the americans disliked akers , so chadwick was appointed technical advisor to the combined policy committee , and the head of the british mission . leaving rotblat in charge in liverpool , chadwick began a tour of the manhattan project facilities in november 1943 , except for the hanford site where plutonium was produced , which he was not allowed to see . he became the only man apart from groves and his second in command to have access to all the american research and production facilities for the uranium bomb . observing the work on the k-25 gaseous diffusion facility at oak ridge , tennessee , chadwick realised how wrong he had been about building the plant in wartime britain . the enormous structure could never have been concealed from the luftwaffe . in early 1944 , he moved to los alamos , new mexico , with his wife and their twins , who now spoke with canadian accents . for security reasons , he was given the cover name of james chaffee . chadwick accepted that the americans did not need british help , but that it could still be useful in bringing the project to an early and successful conclusion . working closely with the director of the manhattan project , major general leslie r . groves , jr . , he attempted to do everything he could to support the effort . he also endeavoured to place british scientists in as many parts of the project as possible in order to facilitate a post-war british nuclear weapons project to which chadwick was committed . requests from groves via chadwick for particular scientists tended to be met with an immediate rejection by the company , ministry or university currently employing them , only to be overcome by the overriding priority accorded to tube alloys . as a result , the british team was critical to the project 's success . although he had more knowledge of the project than anyone else from britain , chadwick had no access to the hanford site . lord portal was offered a tour of hanford in 1946 . '' this was the only plant to which chadwick had been denied access in wartime , and now he asked groves if he could accompany portal . groves replied that he could , but if he did then 'portal will not see very much ' . '' for his efforts , chadwick received a knighthood in the 1945 new year honours . knight bachelor he considered this to be a recognition of the work of the whole tube alloys project . by early 1945 , chadwick was spending most of his time in washington , d.c . , and his family relocated from los alamos to a house on washington 's dupont circle in april 1945 . he was present at the meeting of the combined policy committee on 4 july when field marshal sir henry maitland wilson gave britain 's agreement to use the atomic bomb against japan , and at the trinity nuclear test on 16 july , when the first atomic bomb was detonated . inside its pit was a polonium-beryllium modulated neutron initiator , a development of the technique that chadwick had used to discover the neutron over a decade before . william l . laurence , the new york times reporter attached to the manhattan project , wrote that '' never before in history had any man lived to see his own discovery materialize itself with such telling effect on the destiny of man . '' . later life . shortly after the war ended , chadwick was appointed to the advisory committee on atomic energy ( acae ) . he was also appointed as the british scientific advisor to the united nations atomic energy commission . he clashed with fellow acae member patrick blackett , who disagreed with chadwick 's conviction that britain needed to acquire its own nuclear weapons ; but it was chadwick 's position that was ultimately adopted . he returned to britain in 1946 , to find a country still beset by wartime rationing and shortages . at this time , sir james mountford , the vice chancellor of the university of liverpool , wrote in his diary '' he had never seen a man 'so physically , mentally and spiritually tired '' as chadwick , for he '' had plumbed such depths of moral decision as more fortunate men are never called upon even to peer into & nbsp ; . and suffered & nbsp ; . almost insupportable agonies of responsibility arising from his scientific work ' . '' in 1948 , chadwick accepted an offer to become the master of gonville and caius college . the job was prestigious but ill-defined ; the master was the titular head of the college , but authority actually resided in a council of 13 fellows , of whom one was the master . as master , chadwick strove to improve the academic reputation of the college . he increased the number of research fellowships from 31 to 49 , and sought to bring talent into the college . this involved controversial decisions , such as hiring in 1951 the chinese biochemist tien-chin tsao and the hungarian-born economist peter bauer . in what became known as the peasants ' revolt , fellows led by patrick hadley voted an old friend of chadwick 's off the council and replaced him with bauer . more friends of chadwick 's were removed over the following years , and he retired in november 1958 . it was during his mastership that francis crick , a phd student at gonville and caius college , and james watson discovered the structure of dna . over the years , chadwick received many honours , including the medal for merit from the united states , and the pour le mérite from germany . he was elected a fellow of the royal society in 1927 , and in 1946 he became foreign member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences . he was made a companion of honour in the new year honours on 1 january 1970 for '' services to science '' , companion of honour and went to buckingham palace for the investiture ceremony . he became more frail , and seldom left his flat , although he travelled to liverpool for celebrations of his eightieth birthday . a lifelong atheist , he saw no reason to adopt religious faith in later life . he died in his sleep on 24 july 1974 . his papers are held at the churchill archives centre in cambridge , and are accessible to the public . the chadwick laboratory at the university of liverpool is named after him , as is its sir james chadwick chair of experimental physics , which was named after him in 1991 as part of celebrations of the centenary of his birth . a chadwick ( crater ) is also named after him . the james chadwick building , which houses part of the school of chemical engineering and analytical sciences , university of manchester is named in his honour . he was described by the united kingdom atomic energy authority official historian lorna arnold as '' a physicist , a scientist-diplomat , and a good , wise , and humane man . '' . notes .