Carl Czerny

early life . infancy . carl czerny was born in vienna ( leopoldstadt ) and was baptized in st . leopold parish . czerny ( 1956 ) , p . 302 . his parents were of czech origin ; his mother was moravian . his parents spoke the czech language with him . czerny came from a musical family : his grandfather was a violinist at nymburk , near prague , and his father , wenzel , was an oboist , organist and pianist . czerny ( 1956 ) , pp . 302–305 . when czerny was six months old , his father took a job as a piano teacher at a polish manor and the family moved to poland , where they lived until the third partition of poland prompted the family to return to vienna in 1795 . czerny ( 1956 ) . p . 303 as a child prodigy , czerny began playing piano at age three and composing at age seven . his first piano teacher was his father , who taught him mainly bach , haydn and mozart . he began performing piano recitals in his parents ' home . czerny made his first public performance in 1800 playing mozart 's piano concerto no . 24 ( mozart ) . mitchell ( 1980 ) . studies with beethoven . in 1801 , wenzel krumpholz , a czech composer and violinist , scheduled a presentation for czerny at the home of ludwig van beethoven . beethoven asked czerny to play his pathétique sonata and adelaide . beethoven was impressed with the 10-year-old and accepted him as a pupil . thayer ( 1991 ) , pp . 226–228 . czerny remained under beethoven 's tutelage until 1804 and sporadically thereafter . he particularly admired beethoven 's facility at improvisation , his expertise at fingering , the rapidity of his scales and trills , and his restrained demeanour while performing . thayer ( 1991 ) , p . 368 . czerny 's autobiography and letters give many important references and details of beethoven during this period . czerny was the first to report symptoms of beethoven 's deafness , several years before the matter became public . of his first meeting with beethoven , he wrote : '' i also noticed with that visual quickness peculiar to children that he had cotton which seemed to have been steeped in a yellowish liquid , in his ears . '' cited in thayer ( 1991 ) , p . 227 . czerny was selected by beethoven for the premiere of the latter 's piano concerto no . 1 in 1806 and , at the age of 21 , in february 1812 , czerny gave the vienna premiere of beethoven 's '' emperor '' piano concerto . czerny wrote that his musical memory enabled him to play all the beethoven works by heart without exception and , during the years 1804–1805 , he used to play these works in this manner at prince lichnowsky 's palace once or twice a week , with the prince calling out only the desired opus numbers . mitchell ( 1990 ) , p . 139 czerny maintained a relationship with beethoven throughout his life , and also gave piano lessons to beethoven 's nephew carl . thayer ( 1991 ) , p . 679 . . later career . teacher and composer . at the age of fifteen , czerny began a very successful teaching career . basing his method on the teaching of beethoven and muzio clementi , czerny taught up to twelve lessons a day in the homes of viennese nobility . walker ( 1989 ) , p . 72 . his 'star ' pupils included theodor döhler , stephen heller , sigismond thalberg , and anna caroline oury . mitchell ( 1980 ) , p . 139 . in 1819 , the father of franz liszt brought his son to czerny , who recalled : he was a pale , sickly-looking child , who , while playing , swayed about on the stool as if drunk.his playing was.irregular , untidy , confused , and.he threw his fingers quite arbitrarily all over the keyboard . but that notwithstanding , i was astonished at the talent nature had bestowed upon him . cited in walker ( 1989 ) , p . 67 . liszt became czerny 's most famous pupil . he trained the child with the works of beethoven , clementi , ignaz moscheles and johann sebastian bach . the liszt family lived in the same street in vienna as czerny , who was so impressed by the boy that he taught him free of charge . liszt was later to repay this confidence by introducing the music of czerny at many of his paris recitals . walker ( 1989 ) , pp . 72–73 . shortly before liszt 's vienna concert of 13 april 1823 ( his final concert of that season ) , czerny arranged , with some difficulty ( as beethoven increasingly disliked child prodigies ) the introduction of liszt to beethoven . beethoven was sufficiently impressed with the young liszt to give him a kiss on the forehead . walker ( 1989 ) , pp . 83–84 . liszt remained close to czerny , and in 1852 his transcendental études were published with a dedication to czerny . rowland ( 1998 ) , p . 165 . czerny left vienna only to make trips to italy , france ( in 1837 , when he was assisted by liszt ) walker ( 1989 ) , p . 73 . and england . after 1840 , czerny devoted himself exclusively to composition . he wrote a large number of piano solo exercises for the development of the pianistic technique , designed to cover from the first lessons for children up to the needs of the most advanced virtuoso . ( see list of compositions by carl czerny ) . death . czerny died in vienna at the age of 66 . he never married and had no near relatives . his large fortune he willed to charities ( including an institution for the deaf ) , his housekeeper and the society of friends of music in vienna , after making provision for the performance of a requiem mass in his memory . mitchell ( 1980 ) , p . 140 . . compositions . overview . czerny composed a very large number of pieces ( more than a thousand pieces and up to op . 861 ) . czerny 's works include not only piano music ( études , nocturnes , sonatas , opera theme arrangements and variations ) but also masses and choral music , symphonies , concertos , songs , string quartets and other chamber music . the better known part of czerny 's repertoire is the large number of didactic piano pieces he wrote , such as the school of velocity and the art of finger dexterity . he was one of the first composers to use étude ( '' study '' ) for a title . czerny 's body of works also include arrangements of many popular opera themes . the majority of the pieces called by czerny '' serious music '' ( masses , choral music , quartets , orchestral and chamber music ) remain in unpublished manuscript form and are held by gesellschaft der musikfreunde , to which czerny ( a childless bachelor ) willed his estate . piano music . czerny 's piano sonatas show themselves as an intermediate stage between the works of beethoven and liszt . they blend the traditional sonata form elements with baroque elements , such as the use of fugato , and free forms of fantasy . recordings of these sonatas have been made by martin jones , anton kuerti and daniel blumenthal . czerny 's piano nocturnes show some of the elements present in chopin nocturnes , such as the rhythmic fluidity and the intimate character . chopin met czerny in vienna in 1828 and may have been influenced by his nocturnes . czerny composed approximately 180 pieces that bear the title '' variations '' . among them is la ricordanza , op 33 , which vladimir horowitz recorded . czerny used not only his own themes but themes from other composers as well , including daniel auber , ludwig van beethoven , vincenzo bellini , anton diabelli , gaetano donizetti , joseph haydn , heinrich marschner , wolfgang amadeus mozart , niccolò paganini , gioachino rossini , franz schubert , carl maria von weber and many others . these works range from solo piano pieces to piano pieces for four , six , and eight hands , with some variations having optional accompaniment of orchestra or string quartet . czerny sometimes combined his variations with other genres , such as fantasy , rondo , or impromptu . czerny was one of 50 composers who wrote a variation on a theme of anton diabelli for part ii of the vaterländischer künstlerverein ( published 1824 ) . he also wrote a coda to round out the collection . part i was devoted to the 33 variations supplied by beethoven , his diabelli variations , op . 120 . together with liszt , chopin , henri herz , johann peter pixis and sigismond thalberg , czerny was a contributor to the compendium set of variations for piano , hexameron ( 1837 ) . other compositions . the seven symphonies of czerny began to be recorded in 1990s . in the 21st century , two new symphonies came to light ( symphony no . 6 and a large symphony written in 1814 ) ; also two overtures ( in c minor and e major ) and some symphonic choral music ( psalm 130 and '' die macht des gesanges '' ) . czerny was a prolific composer of chamber music , normally including the piano : trios for strings and piano , quintets for strings and piano , sonatas for violin and piano , and also piano variations with flute , horn , and other instruments . however , there are many works without piano , including string quartets . czerny , a devout catholic , also composed many religious pieces . these works include a number of masses and hymns . publications . in 1842 czerny published an autobiographical sketch , '' erinnerungen aus meinem leben '' ( '' memories from my life '' ) . other works by czerny , apart from his compositions , include : his edition of johann sebastian bach 's the well-tempered clavier ; '' letters to a young lady , on the art of playing the pianoforte '' ; his '' school of practical composition '' ( published as his op . 600 ) ; his edition of domenico scarlatti 's sonatas ( 1840 ) ; and '' on the proper performance of all beethoven 's works for piano '' ( 1846 ) . mitchell ( 1980 ) , p . 141 . . legacy . influence . czerny can be considered as a father of modern piano technique for generations of pianists , when it is taken into account that many of his students , such as theodor leschetizky , franz liszt and theodor kullak , also became teachers and passed on his legacy . the us music magazine the etude presented in its issue of april 1927 an illustration ( see above ) showing how czerny could be considered the father of modern piano technique and the basis of an entire generation of pianists . this list can be extended to the present day : examples of 'descent ' are : wanda landowska : pupil of moritz moszkowski ← theodor kullak ← czerny ; sergei prokofiev : pupil of anna yesipova ← theodor leschetizky ← czerny ; claudio arrau : pupil of martin krause ← liszt ← czerny ; ernő dohnányi : pupil of istván thomán ← liszt ← czerny ; georges cziffra : pupil of istván thomán ← liszt ← czerny ; daniel barenboim : pupil of edwin fischer ← martin krause ← liszt ← czerny ; van cliburn : pupil of rildia bee cliburn ← arthur friedheim ← liszt ← czerny ; sergei rachmaninoff : pupil of alexander siloti ← liszt ← czerny ; leon fleisher : pupil of artur schnabel ← theodor leschetizky ← czerny ; czerny wrote an essay on the correct performing of the piano sonatas of beethoven , '' on the proper performance of all beethoven 's works for piano '' ( 1846 ) . johannes brahms wrote about it to clara schumann in a letter of march 1878 : '' i certainly think czerny 's large pianoforte course op . 500 is worthy of study , particularly in regard to what he says about beethoven and the performance of his works , for he was a diligent and attentive pupil & nbsp ; . czerny 's fingering is particularly worthy for attention . in fact i think that people today ought to have more respect for this excellent man '' letters of clara schumann and johannes brahms , ed . berthold litzmann , 2 vols . new york : longamnn , green , 1927 ; rep . , new york : vienna house , 1973 in a letter written to otto jahn of 30 october 1852 , liszt wrote : '' in the twenties , when a great portion of beethoven 's creations was a kind of sphinx , czerny was playing beethoven exclusively , with an understanding as excellent as his technique was efficient and effective ; and , later on , he did not set himself up against some progress that had been made in technique , but contributed materially to it by his own teaching and works . '' autograph in the liszt archives of the musik-verein in vienna . czerny had an influential role in defining the canon of classical piano repertoire . volume 4 ( 1847 ) of his theoretico-practical piano school listed what he considered to be the most important piano works of the previous eighty years , including works of mozart , clementi , chopin , schumann , liszt , schubert , mendelssohn , and works of his own . rowland ( 1998 ) , pp . 125–126 . . reputation . from czerny 's death until the end of the 20th century , negative views about his work have predominated . robert schumann in the neue zeitschrift für musik ( new musical gazette ) , said of czerny 's op . 424 : '' it would be difficult to find a failure of imagination greater than that of czerny . '' liszt included several czerny compositions in his repertoire and also dedicated his twelve transcendental études to czerny . he also collaborated with czerny on the hexaméron . but even liszt suggested , in an 1852 letter to otto jahn : '' it is . a pity that , by a too super-abundant productiveness , he has necessarily weakened himself , and has not gone on further on the road of his first sonata ( op . 7 , a-flat major ) and of other works of that period , which i rate very highly , as compositions of importance , beautifully formed and having the noblest tendency . '' in '' men , women and pianos '' arthur loesser describes czerny 's music as '' without depth , intensity , or wit , but always smooth and pretty and rather ear-tickling when played fast & nbsp ; . endless variety of patterns and endless monotony of import . '' loesser ( 1990 ) , p . 145 more positive views have been offered by musicians such as anton kuerti , kuerti ( 1997 ) . brahms , and leon botstein . botstein ( 2004 ) igor stravinsky wrote about his admiration for czerny also as a composer : '' as to czerny , i have been appreciating the full-blooded musician in him more than the remarkable pedagogue . '' in chronique de ma vie , . references . ; notes ; sources botstein , leon ( 2004 ) . '' beethoven 's pupil '' , american symphony orchestra programme note , accessed 23 september 2014 . czerny , carl , tr . ernest sanders ( 1956 ) . '' recollections from my life '' ( 1842 ) , in '' the musical quarterly '' , july 1956 , vol . xlii , no . 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 302–317 . kuerti , anton ( 1997 ) . '' carl czerny : in the shadow of beethoven '' , in queen 's quarterly , september 1997 , vol . 104 , no . 3 . accessed 23 september 2014 . loesser , arthur ( 1990 ) . men , women and pianos : a social history . new york : dover publications . mitchell , alíce l . ( 1980 ) . '' czerny , carl '' in the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , ed . stanley sadie , vol . 5 , pp . & nbsp ; 138–141 . london : macmillan . rowland , david ( ed . ) ( 1998 ) . cambridge companions to music . cambridge : cambridge university press . thayer , alexander wheelock , rev.and ed . elliot forbes ( 1991 ) . thayer 's life of beethoven ( 2 vols ) . princeton : princeton university press . walker , alan ( 1988 ) . franz liszt : the virtuoso years 1811–1847 . london : faber . external links . carl czerny music festival and international symposium 13–26 june 2002 , edmonton , alberta . '' an underestimated master : a critical analysis of carl czerny 's eleven piano sonatas and his contribution to the genre '' ( dissertation by levi keith larson for the requirements of u . nebraska-lincoln , 2015 . description and ( personal/research ) download . )