John Sergeant (journalist)

early life . the son of a missionary and linguist , sergeant is of russian origin on his mother 's side . autobiography give me ten seconds by john sergeant : macmillan 2001 . on page 19 : '' horatio cook , john 's maternal grandfather was a loyal englishman but also deeply russian . he could pass without difficulty as a russian and in odessa he married the daughter of a priest . my mother would later boast that because of the orthodox tradition . she could lay claim to ancestors going back a thousand years to the beginning of christianity in russia . '' sergeant 's early life meant that he followed his father 's work , and was brought up in locations including jerusalem and oxford . sergeant was educated at great tew primary school , briefly at the independent bloxham school near banbury , in oxfordshire , and then at the independent millfield school in street , somerset . sergeant graduated from magdalen college , oxford , where he studied philosophy , politics and economics . whilst at university sergeant performed in student comedy revues . after graduation he starred with alan bennett in a series of sketch shows on the bbc entitled on the margin and wrote comedy scripts . he then trained as a journalist at darlington college while reporting for the liverpool echo . whilst in washington during his '' gap year '' he was present in the crowd to witness martin luther king jr . 's '' i have a dream '' speech in 1963 . career . sergeant started his journalism career as a correspondent for the liverpool echo where he worked for around three years before joining the bbc as a radio reporter in 1970 . he was tasked to join the international desk , covering stories in over 25 countries . he then worked as a war reporter in vietnam and israel and reported the death of the first british soldier during the troubles in northern ireland . he later covered the opening sessions of the european parliament and became a political correspondent in 1981 . he then worked on a documentary called '' the europe we joined '' and has presented bbc radio 4 programmes today and the world at one . having progressed through newspaper , radio and television journalism , he became the bbc 's chief political correspondent from 1992 until 2000 . in 2000 , sergeant joined itn as political editor , replacing the retiring michael brunson . sergeant retired himself in 2002 and was replaced at itn by nick robinson . highlights . in 1987 , in moscow following margaret thatcher , he made a comment implying that she had already started campaigning for the general election in june 1987 , despite not having officially declared the contest . '' i am serving my country '' , thatcher replied . one of his most memorable moments was when he waited outside the british embassy in paris for thatcher , in the hope of hearing her reaction to the first ballot in the party leadership contest of 1990 , only to be pushed aside by her press secretary , sir bernard ingham , when thatcher emerged from the building . for this broadcast , sergeant won the british press guild award for the most memorable broadcast of the year , beating paul gascoigne who had been nominated for bursting into tears during the 1990 fifa world cup semi-final against west germany . another political scoop was gained when he was granted the only interview with the then welsh secretary , ron davies , after he had been forced to resign following his '' moment of madness '' on clapham common in october 1998 . strictly come dancing . sergeant competed with partner kristina rihanoff in the sixth series of strictly come dancing which began on 20 september 2008 . although he repeatedly finished bottom of the score board after the judges ' votes , the public consistently voted to keep him in the competition , prompting criticism of the viewers ' voting by the judges and some dancers . john sergeant dances through divide , bbc news , 17 november 2008 he left the show in week 10 following a farewell dance saying : '' the trouble is that there is now a real danger that i might win the competition . even for me that would be a joke too far . '' . after strictly . sergeant has appeared on television programmes such as have i got news for you . he is currently a reporter for the one show . when the hosts adrian chiles and christine bleakley were on holiday sergeant hosted the show alongside myleene klass for a week starting on 24 august 2009 . sergeant has been a guest in countdowns dictionary corner with susie dent . in february 2009 he appeared on qi ( series f , episode 10 ) . in 2014 he became the narrator for the uk version of the interesting facts game programme , duck quacks do n't echo , first series only . he has since subsequently been engaged by mentorn tv to produce a number of documentaries that include a three-part series entitled john sergeant 's tourist trail in which he asked the question '' why do tourists come to britain ? '' he is currently filming a new two-part documentary for mentorn tv where he explores indian railways . he was also the host of argumental , a comedy debating game on dave . in 2011 he was the narrator for the itv television series grimefighters . sergeant presented this bbc series on the humble beginnings of the british indian railway and its legacy . he follows the path of the early railway engineers and also presents the use of the railways in the extensive growth of india now . sergeant presented britain 's first photo album about the pioneering photography of francis frith . it aired 12–23 march 2012 on bbc two . frith travelled through britain in victorian era capturing life in photographic form ; many of his pictures were subsequently sold as picture postcards . in 2015 , sergeant began presenting the factual itv series barging round britain with john sergeant ( also shown under the alternative title britain 's best canals with john sergeant ) . the programme returned for a second series in april 2016 . personal life . whilst appearing on the itv game show the chase , sergeant made clear the one memory he has over his many years of experience in broadcasting is when he was a young man working in washington , d.c . ; he heard martin luther king jr . 's 1963 speech '' i have a dream '' live , at the lincoln memorial . lincoln memorial ( u.s . national park service ) he was president of the johnson society in 2003 . interviewed by sophie lam in the independent in june 2008 about his holiday memories , he stated : '' i 'm programmed not to be disappointed by holidays . '' he has two sons , will and mike : the latter is also a journalist , working at the bbc as a reporter . sergeant once saved his son 's life after mike began choking on a 50p coin at a restaurant aged two . sergeant managed to dislodge the coin with his first aid knowledge . sergeant was presented with a doctor of letters , honoris causa by university of lincoln chancellor lord victor adebowale cbe on 3 september 2013 at 2:30 & nbsp ; pm in lincoln cathedral . . references . external links . biographical details and 2003 address to the johnson society