Cassette deck

history . origins . image : teactopcassettedeck.jpg thumb right typical teac top loading stereo cassette deck from mid-1970s image : radioshack-ctr-119.jpg thumb right a typical portable desktop cassette recorder from radioshack . the first consumer tape recorder to employ a tape reel permanently housed in a small removable cartridge was the rca tape cartridge , which appeared in 1958 as a predecessor to the cassette format . at that time , reel to reel recorders and players were commonly used by enthusiasts , but required large individual reels and tapes which had to be threaded by hand , making them less-accessible to the casual consumer . both rca and bell sound attempted to commercialize the cartridge format , but a few factors stalled adoption , including lower-than-advertised availability of selections in the prerecorded media catalog , delays in production setup , and a stand-alone design that was not considered by audiophiles to be truly hi-fi . the '' compact cassette '' ( a philips trademark ) was introduced by the philips corporation at the internationale funkausstellung berlin in 1963 mourning and celebrating 50 years of compact cassette - soundblog , 23 march 2013 . retrieved 25 august 2013 . rewound . on its 50th birthday , the cassette tape is still rolling . time magazine , 12 august 2013 , p . 56-57 and marketed as a device purely intended for portable speech-only dictation machines . the tape width was 1 ⁄ 8 & nbsp ; inch ( actually 0.15 & nbsp ; inch , 3.81 & nbsp ; mm ) and tape speed was 1.875 & nbsp ; inches ( 4.8 & nbsp ; cm ) per second , giving a decidedly non hi-fi frequency response and quite high noise levels . early recorders were intended for dictation and journalists , and were typically hand-held battery-powered devices with built-in microphones and automatic gain control on recording . tape recorder audio-quality had improved by the mid-1970s , and a cassette deck with manual level controls and vu meters became a standard component of home high-fidelity systems . eventually the reel-to-reel recorder was completely displaced , in part because of the usage constraints presented by their large size , expense , and the inconvenience of threading and rewinding the tape reels - cassettes are more portable and can be stopped and immediately removed in the middle of playback without rewinding . cassettes became extremely popular for automotive and other portable music applications . although pre-recorded cassettes were widely available , many users would combine ( dub ) songs from their vinyl records or cassettes to make a new custom mixtape cassette . in 1970 , the advent corporation combined dolby b noise reduction system with chromium dioxide ( cro 2 ) tape to create the advent model 200 , the first high-fidelity cassette deck . advent cassette decks dolby b uses volume companding of high frequencies to boost low-level treble information by up to 9 & nbsp ; db , reducing them ( and the hiss ) on playback . cro 2 used different bias and equalization settings to reduce the overall noise level and extend the high frequency response . together these allowed a usefully flat frequency response beyond 15 & nbsp ; khz for the first time . this deck was based on a top-loading mechanism by nakamichi , then soon replaced by the model 201 based on a more reliable transport made by wollensak , a division of 3m , which was commonly used in audio/visual applications . both featured an unusual single vu meter which could be switched between or for both channels . the model 200 featured piano key style transport controls , with the model 201 using the distinctive combination of a separate lever for rewind/fast forward and the large play and stop button as found on their commercial reel to reel machines of the era . most manufacturers adopted a standard top-loading format with piano key controls , dual vu meters , and slider level controls . there was a variety of configurations leading to the next standard format in the late 1970s , which settled on front-loading ( see main picture ) with cassette well on one side , dual vu meters on the other , and later dual-cassette decks with meters in the middle . mechanical controls were replaced with electronic push buttons controlling solenoid mechanical actuators , though low cost models would retain mechanical controls . some models could search and count gaps between songs . widespread use . cassette decks soon came into widespread use and were designed variously for professional applications , home audio systems , and for mobile use in cars , as well as portable recorders . from the mid-1970s to the late 1990s the cassette deck was the preferred music source for the automobile . like an 8-track cartridge , it was relatively insensitive to vehicle motion , but it had reduced tape flutter , as well as the obvious advantages of smaller physical size and fast forward/rewind capability . a major boost to the cassette 's popularity came with the release of the sony walkman '' personal '' cassette player in 1979 , designed specifically as a headphone-only ultra-compact '' wearable '' music source . although the vast majority of such players eventually sold were not sony products , the name '' walkman '' has become synonymous with this type of device . cassette decks were eventually manufactured by almost every well known brand in home audio , and many in professional audio , with each company offering models of very high quality . performance improvements and additional features . cassette decks reached their pinnacle of performance and complexity by the mid-1980s . cassette decks from companies such as nakamichi , revox , and tandberg incorporated advanced features such as multiple tape heads and dual capstan drive with separate reel motors . auto-reversing decks became popular and were standard on most factory installed automobile decks . the first auto reverse cassette deck came from dual in germany in 1974 . the dual c 901 . as a part of the digital revolution , the ongoing development of electronics moore 's law to the point that the technology could be applied to consumer electronics . the application of such digital electronics to cassette decks provides an early example of mechatronic design , which aims to enhance mechanical systems with electronic components in order to improve performance , increase system flexibility , or reduce cost . the inclusion of logic gate and solenoid into the transport and control mechanisms of cassette decks , often referred to '' logic control , '' contrasts with earlier '' piano-key '' transport controls and mechanical linkages . one goal of using logic circuitry in cassette decks or recorders was to error-tolerant design by including fail-safe into the transport and control mechanism . '' by the provision of a logical circuit in the control circuit for a magnetic recorder , even when the keys of the key board are actuated in any desired sequence , the magnetic recorder and its associated devices can be promptly and precisely controlled without causing any damages thereon . '' such fail-safe behavior was described in a review by julian hirsch of a particular cassette deck featuring logic control . some examples of fail-safe mechanisms incorporated into logic control decks include : a mechanism designed to protect internal components from damage when the tape or motor is locked , a mechanism designed to prevent the tape from being wound improperly , among others . some logic control decks were designed to incorporate light-touch buttons or remote control , among other features marketed as being convenient . in the car stereo industry , full logic control was developed with the aim of miniaturization , so that the cassette deck would take up less dashboard space . three-head technology uses separate heads for recording and playback ( the third of the three heads being the erase head ) . this allows different record and playback head gaps to be used . a narrower head gap is optimal for playback than for recording , so the head gap width of any combined record/playback head must necessarily be a compromise . separate record and playback heads also allow off-the-tape monitoring during recording , permitting immediate verification of the recording quality . ( such machines can be identified by the presence of a '' monitor '' switch with positions for '' tape '' and '' source '' , or similar . ) three-head systems were common on reel-to-reel decks , but were more difficult to implement for cassettes , which do not provide separate openings for record and play heads . some models squeezed a monitor head into the capstan area , and others combined separate record and playback gaps into a single headshell . fonoforum.de 8/1991 , testreport dolby-s-kassettendeck ( german ; pdf , 2 mb ) the dolby noise reduction system was key to realizing low noise performance on slow , narrow , cassette tapes . it works by boosting the high frequencies on recording , especially low-level high-frequency sounds , with corresponding high frequency reduction on playback . this lowers the high frequency noise ( hiss ) by approximately 9 & nbsp ; db . enhanced versions included dolby c ( in 1980 ) and dolby s types . of the three , however , only dolby b became common on automobile decks . bang & olufsen developed the hx pro headroom extension system in conjunction with dolby laboratories in 1982 . this was used in many higher-end decks . hx pro reduces the high-frequency bias during recording when the signal being recorded has a high level of high frequency content . such a signal is self-biasing . reducing the level of the bias signal permits the desired signal to be recorded at a higher level without saturating the tape , thus increasing '' headroom '' or maximum recording level . some decks incorporated microprocessor programs to adjust tape bias and record level calibration automatically . in later years , an '' auto reverse '' feature appeared that allowed the deck to play ( and , in some decks , record ) on both sides of the cassette without the operator having to manually remove , flip , and re-insert the cassette . most auto-reverse machines use a four channel head ( similar to those on multitrack recorders ) , with only two channels connected to the electronics at one time , one pair for each direction . auto-reverse decks employ a capstan and pinch roller for each side . since these use the same opening in the cassette shell normally used for the erase head , such decks must fit the erase head ( or two , one for each direction ) into the center opening in the shell along with the record/play head . in later auto reverse machines , the '' auto reverse '' mechanism uses an ordinary two-track , quarter-width head , but operates by mechanically rotating the head 180 degrees so that the two head gaps access the other tracks of the tape . there is usually an azimuth adjustment screw for each position . nevertheless , due to the repeated movement , the alignment ( in particular , the azimuth ) deviates with usage . even in a machine with a four channel head , slight asymmetries in the cassette shell make it difficult to align the head perfectly for both directions . in one machine , the '' dragon '' , nakamichi addressed the issue with a motor-driven automatic head alignment mechanism . this proved effective but very expensive . later nakamichi auto-reverse models , the rx series , was essentially a single-directional deck , but with an added mechanism that physically removed the cassette from the transport , flipped it over , and re-inserted it . akai made a similar machine but with the mechanism and cassette laid out horizontally instead of upright . this permitted the convenience of auto-reverse with little compromise in record or playback quality . new tape formulations were introduced . chromium dioxide ( referred to as cro 2 or type ii ) was the first tape designed for extended high frequency response , but it required higher bias . later , as the iec type ii standard was defined , a different equalization settings was also mandated to reduce hiss , thus giving up some extension at the high end of the audio spectrum . better-quality cassette recorders soon appeared with a switch for the tape type . later decks incorporated coded holes in the shell to autodetect the tape type . chromium dioxide tape was thought to cause increased wear on the heads , so tdk and maxell adapted cobalt-doped ferric formulations to mimic cro 2 . sony briefly tried ferrichrome ( type iii ) which claimed to combine the best of both ; some people , however , stated that the reverse was true because the cr top layer seemed to wear off quickly , reducing this type to fe in practice . most recent decks produce the best response and dynamic headroom with metal tapes ( iec type iv ) which require still higher bias for recording , though they will play back correctly at the ii setting since the equalization is the same . with all of these improvements , the best units could record and play the full audible spectrum from 20 & nbsp ; hz to over 20 & nbsp ; khz ( although this was commonly quoted at -10 , -20 or even -30 & nbsp ; db , not at full output level ) , with wow ( recording ) less than 0.05 % and very low noise . a high-quality recording on cassette could rival the sound of an average commercial cd , though the quality of pre-recorded cassettes has been regarded by the general public as lower than could be achieved in a quality home recording . there was a call for better sound quality in 1981 , surprisingly by the head of tower records , russ solomon . at a meeting of the national association of recording merchandisers ( narm ) retail advisory committee in carlsbad , california , solomon played two recordings of a santana track ; one he had recorded himself and the pre-recorded cassette release from columbia records . he used this technique to demonstrate what he called '' the tunnel effect '' in the audio range of pre-recorded cassettes and commented to the reporter sam sutherland , who wrote a news article printed in billboard magazine : '' the buyer who is aware of sound quality is making his own . '' . '' they wo n't be satisfied with the 'tunnel effect ' of prerecorded tape . and home tape deck users do n't use prerecorded tapes at all . '' yet , contended solomon , while tower 's own stores show strong blank tape sales gains , it 's prerecorded sales have increased by only 2 % to 3 % . with an estimated 15 % of the chain 's total tape business now generated by the sales of blanks , '' it would appear our added tape sales are going to tdk , maxell and sony , not you . '' he concluded . - billboard magazine , vol . 93 , no . 38 , 26 sep 1981 . . noise reduction and fidelity . a variety of noise reduction and other schemes are used to increase fidelity , with dolby b being almost universal for both prerecorded tapes and home recording . dolby b was designed to address the high-frequency noise inherent in cassette tapes , and along with improvements in tape formulation it helped the cassette win acceptances as a high-fidelity medium . at the same time , dolby b provided acceptable performance when played back on decks that lacked dolby circuitry , meaning there was little reason not to use it if it was available . the main alternative to dolby was the dbx noise reduction system , which achieved a high signal-to-noise ratio , but was essentially unlistenable when played back on decks that lacked the dbx decoding circuitry . philips developed an alternative noise reduction system known as dynamic noise limiter ( dnl ) which did not require the tapes to be processed during recording ; this was also the basis of the later dnr noise reduction . circuit and description of dnl url accessed august 25 , 2006 dolby later introduced dolby c and dolby s noise reduction , which achieved higher levels of noise reduction ; dolby c became common on high-fidelity decks , but dolby s , released when cassette sales had begun to decline , never achieved widespread use . it was only licensed for use on higher end tape decks that included dual motors , triple heads , and other refinements . dolby hx pro headroom extension provided better high-frequency response by adjusting the inaudible tape bias during the recording of strong high-frequency sounds , which had a bias effect of their own . developed by bang & olufsen , it did not require a decoder to play back . since b & o held patent rights and required paying license fees , many other manufacturers refrained from using it too . other refinements to improve cassette performance included tandberg 's dyneq , toshiba 's and telefunken 's high com , and on some high-end decks , automatic recording bias , fine pitch adjustment and ( sometimes ) head azimuth adjustment such as the tandberg tcd-330 and tcd-340a . by the late 1980s , thanks to such improvements in the electronics , the tape material and manufacturing techniques , as well as dramatic improvements to the precision of the cassette shell , tape heads and transport mechanics , sound fidelity on equipment from the top manufacturers far surpassed the levels originally expected of the medium . on suitable audio equipment , cassettes could produce a very pleasant listening experience . high-end cassette decks could achieve 15 & nbsp ; hz-22 & nbsp ; khz±3 & nbsp ; db frequency response with wow and flutter below 0.022 % , and a signal-to-noise ratio of up to 61 & nbsp ; db ( for type iv tape , without noise-reduction ) . with noise reduction typical signal-to-noise figures of 70-76 & nbsp ; db with dolby c , 80-86 & nbsp ; db with dolby s , and 85 - 90 & nbsp ; db with dbx could be achieved . many casual listeners could not tell the difference between compact cassette and compact disc . from the early 1980s , the fidelity of prerecorded cassettes began to improve dramatically . whereas dolby b was already in widespread use in the 1970s , prerecorded cassettes were duplicated onto rather poor quality tape stock at ( often ) high speed and did not compare in fidelity to high-grade lps . however , systems such as xdr , along with the adoption of higher-grade tape ( such as chromium dioxide , but typically recorded in such a way as to play back at the normal 120 μs position ) , and the frequent use of dolby hx pro , meant that cassettes became a viable high-fidelity option , one that was more portable and required less maintenance than records . in addition , cover art , which had generally previously been restricted to a single image of the lp cover along with a minimum of text , began to be tailored to cassettes as well , with fold-out lyric sheets or librettos and fold-out sleeves becoming commonplace . some companies , such as mobile fidelity , produced audiophile cassettes in the 1980s , which were recorded on high-grade tape and duplicated on premium equipment in real time from a digital master . unlike audiophile lps , which continue to attract a following , these became moot after the compact disc became widespread . almost all cassette decks have an mpx filter to improve the sound quality and the tracking of the noise reduction system when recording from a fm stereo broadcast . however , in many especially cheaper decks , this filter can not be disabled , and because of that record/playback frequency response in those decks typically is limited to 16 & nbsp ; khz . in other decks , the mpx filter can be switched off or on independently from the dolby switch . on yet other decks , the filter is off by default , and an option to switch it on or off is only provided when dolby is activated ; this prevents the mpx filter from being used when it 's not required . in-car entertainment systems . a key element of the cassette 's success was its use in in-car entertainment systems , where the small size of the tape was significantly more convenient than the competing 8-track cartridge system . cassette players in cars and for home use were often integrated with a radio receiver . in-car cassette players were the first to adopt automatic reverse ( '' auto-reverse '' ) of the tape direction at each end , allowing a cassette to be played endlessly without manual intervention . home cassette decks soon added the feature . cassette tape adaptors have been developed which allow newer media players to be played through existing cassette decks , in particular those in cars which generally do not have input jacks . these units do not suffer from reception problems from fm transmitter based system to play back media players through the fm radio , though supported frequencies for fm transmitters that are n't used on commercial broadcasters in a given region ( e.g . any frequency below 88.1 in the us ) somewhat eliminates that problem . maintenance . cassette equipment needs regular maintenance , as cassette tape is a magnetic medium which is in physical contact with the tape head and other metallic parts of the recorder/player mechanism . without such maintenance , the high frequency response of the cassette equipment will suffer . one problem occurs when iron oxide ( or similar ) particles from the tape itself become lodged in the playback head . as a result , the tape heads will require occasional cleaning to remove such particles . the metal capstan and the rubber pinch roller can become coated with these particles , leading them to pull the tape less precisely over the head ; this in turn leads to misalignment of the tape over the head azimuth , producing noticeably unclear high tones , just as if the head itself were out of alignment . isopropyl alcohol and denatured alcohol are both suitable head-cleaning fluids . the heads and other metallic components in the tape path ( such as spindles and capstans ) may become magnetized with use , and require demagnetizing ( see cassette demagnetizer ) . decline in popularity . analog cassette deck sales were expected to decline rapidly with the advent of the compact disc and other digital recording technologies such as digital audio tape ( dat ) , minidisc , and the cd-r recorder drives . philips responded with the digital compact cassette , a system which was backward-compatible with existing analog cassette recordings for playback , but it failed to garner a significant market share and was withdrawn . one reason proposed for the lack of acceptance of digital recording formats such as dat was a fear by content providers that the ability to make very high quality copies would hurt sales of copyrighted recordings . the rapid transition was not realized and cds and cassettes successfully co-existed for nearly 20 years . a contributing factor may have been the inability of early cd players to reliably read discs with surface damage and offer anti-skipping features for applications where external vibration would be present , such as automotive and recreation environments . early cd playback equipment also tended to be expensive compared to cassette equipment of similar quality and did not offer recording capability . many home and portable entertainment systems supported both formats and commonly allowed the cd playback to be recorded on cassette tape . the rise of inexpensive all-solid-state portable digital music systems based on mp3 , aac and similar formats finally saw the eventual decline of the domestic cassette deck . as of 2020 , marantz , teac , and tascam are among the few companies still manufacturing cassette decks in relatively small quantities for professional and niche market use . by the late 1990s , automobiles were offered with entertainment systems that played both cassettes and cds . by the end of the late 2000s , very few cars were offered with cassette decks . the last vehicle model in the united states that included a factory-installed cassette player was the 2010 lexus sc 430 . as radios became tightly integrated into dashboards , many cars lacked even standard openings that would accept aftermarket cassette player installations . despite the decline in the production of cassette decks , these products are still valued by some . many blind and elderly people find the newest digital technologies very difficult to use compared to the cassette format . cassette tapes are not vulnerable to scratching from handling ( though the exposed magnetic tape is vulnerable to stretching from poking ) , and play from where they were last stopped ( though some modern mp3 players offer savestating electronically ) . cassette tapes can also be recorded multiple times ( though some solid-state digital recorders are now offering that function ) . today , cassette decks are not considered by most people to be either the most versatile or highest fidelity sound recording devices available , as even very inexpensive cd or digital audio players can reproduce a wide frequency range with no speed variations . many current budget-oriented cassette decks lack a tape selector to set proper bias and equalization settings to take best advantage of the extended high end of type ii high bias and type iv metal bias tapes . cassettes remain popular for audio-visual applications . some cd recorders , particularly those intended for business use , incorporate a cassette deck to allow both formats for recording meetings , church sermons , and books on tape . references . external links . audio asylum tape trail – a discussion forum of interest to those involved in cassette technology . vintage cassette decks - a collection of vintage cassette decks of all brands .