1989 in literature

events . february 14 – ayatollah ruhollah khomeini , supreme leader of iran ( died 3 june 1989 ) , issues a fatwa calling for the death of indian-born british author salman rushdie and his publishers for issuing the novel the satanic verses ( 1988 ) . on february 24 iran places a us 3 million bounty on rushdie 's head . march 1 – the berne convention implementation act of 1988 comes into effect in the united states , making the country a party to the berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works of 1886 . april 23 – leading figures of the theatre mark william shakespeare 's birthday with a street party to oppose the destruction of the recently-discovered archaeological remains of the english renaissance rose theatre and globe theatres in london . the rose theatre trust . accessed 15 july 2014 october – the national library of norway is established , with a new building at mo i rana . december 29 – playwright václav havel becomes president of czechoslovakia . new books . fiction . hanan al-shaykh – women of sand and myrrh ( misk al–ghazal ) martin amis – london fields piers anthony – total recall iain banks – canal dreams john banville – the book of evidence clive barker – the great and secret show julian barnes – a history of the world in 10½ chapters thomas berger – changing the past larry bond – red phoenix anthony burgess – any old iron nick cave – and the ass saw the angel tom clancy – clear and present danger mary higgins clark – while my pretty one sleeps hugh cook – the wicked and the witless bernard cornwell sharpe 's revenge sea lord ( aka killer 's wake ) bryce courtenay – the power of one robert crais – stalking the angel lindsey davis – the silver pigs l . sprague de camp the honorable barbarian ( with fletcher pratt ) – the complete compleat enchanter e . l . doctorow – billy bathgate katherine dunn – geek love umberto eco – foucault 's pendulum george alec effinger – a fire in the sun mircea eliade ( died 1986 ) – diary of a short-sighted adolescent ( romanul adolescentului miop ) ( written 1921–1925 ) ben elton – stark steve erickson – tours of the black clock laura esquivel – like water for chocolate ( como agua para chocolate ) ken follett – the pillars of the earth frederick forsyth – the negotiator gabriel garcía márquez – the general in his labyrinth ( el general en su laberinto ) john gardner licence to kill win , lose or die charles gill – the boozer challenge john grisham – a time to kill a . m . homes – jack robert e . howard , l . sprague de camp and lin carter – the conan chronicles john irving – a prayer for owen meany kazuo ishiguro – the remains of the day fleur jaeggy – : it : i beati anni del castigo ( sweet days of discipline ) randall kenan – a visitation of spirits elias khoury – رحلة غاندي الصغير ( rihlat ghandi al-saghir , the journey of little gandhi ) stephen king – the dark half lászló krasznahorkai – the melancholy of resistance ( az ellenállás melankóliája ) joe r . lansdale cold in july by bizarre hands john le carré – the russia house h . p . lovecraft – the horror in the museum and other revisions ( corrected edition ) hilary mantel – fludd javier marías – todas las almas ( all souls ) james a . michener – six days in havana bharati mukherjee – jasmine larry niven – the legacy of heorot robert b . parker – playmates ellis peters the heretic 's apprentice the potter 's field giuseppe pontiggia – la grande sera terry pratchett guards ! guards ! ' pyramids paul quarrington – whale music mordecai richler – solomon gursky was here giampaolo rugarli – il nido di ghiaccio josé saramago – the history of the siege of lisbon sidney sheldon – the sands of time dan simmons – hyperion john skipp and craig spector – book of the dead danielle steel daddy star bruce sterling – crystal express alexander stuart – the war zone amy tan – the joy luck club shashi tharoor – the great indian novel rose tremain – restoration jane vandenburgh – failure to zig-zag andrew vachss – hard candy alice walker – the temple of my familiar robert mcliam wilson – ripley bogle roger zelazny frost & fire ( short stories and essays ) knight of shadows . children and young people . verna aardema – rabbit makes a monkey of lion joyce barkhouse – pit pony bruce coville – my teacher is an alien anne fine bill 's new frock goggle-eyes mark helprin ( with chris van allsburg ) – swan lake yoshi kogo – big al norman maclean ( with barry moser ) – a river runs through it bill martin jr . ( with lois elhert ) – chicka chicka boom boom david mckee – elmer jim murphy – the call of the wolves andre norton ( with martin h . greenberg and braldt bralds ) – catfantastic : nine lives and fifteen tales bill peet – bill peet : an autobiography robert d . san souci – the talking eggs : a folktale from the american south jon scieszka ( with lane smith ) – the true story of the 3 little pigs ! r . l . stine – the new girl ( first in the fear street series of 55 books ) christopher tolkien ( with j . r . r . tolkien and alan lee ) – the treason of isengard . drama . herman brusselmans and tom lanoye – de canadese muur ( the canadian wall ) jim cartwright – two nick darke – kissing the pope ( original title : campesinos ) michael wall – amongst barbarians keith waterhouse – jeffrey bernard is unwell . poetry . simon armitage – zoom ! paul fleischman – joyful noise : poems for two voices david lehman – the best american poetry 1989 . non-fiction . gisela bleibtreu-ehrenberg – angst und vorurteil bill bryson – the lost continent : travels in small-town america rodney cotterill – no ghost in the machine : modern science and the brain , the mind , and the soul stephen r . covey – the seven habits of highly effective people bruno dagens – angkor : heart of an asian empire william dalrymple – in xanadu : a quest cynthia enloe – bananas , beaches and bases stanley hauerwas and william willimon – resident aliens : life in the christian colony rüdiger imhof – john banville : a critical introduction , the first full-length appraisal of the work of major turn of the century writer john banville . weekend . tim jeal – baden-powell bob kane and tom andrae – batman and me john keegan – the face of battle dale maharidge and michael williamson – and their children after them peter mayle – a year in provence claudia moatti – à la recherche de la rome antique ann moir and david jessel – brain sex new revised standard version of the bible michael palin – around the world in 80 days harold perkin – the rise of professional society . england since 1880 gilda radner – it 's always something dan topolski and patrick robinson – true blue : the oxford boat race mutiny v . vale and andrea juno – modern primitives andy warhol and pat hackett – the andy warhol diaries jeremy wilson – lawrence of arabia : the authorized biography of t.e . lawrence bob wood – big ten country . births . july 11 – david henrie , american actor and screenwriter . deaths . january 4 – srikrishna alanahalli , indian novelist and poet ( born 1947 ) january 8 – bruce chatwin , english travel writer and novelist ( born 1940 ) february 3 – john cassavetes , american actor , director and writer ( born 1929 ) february 12 – thomas bernhard , austrian author ( born 1931 ) march 14 – edward abbey , american essayist ( born 1927 ) march 27 – malcolm cowley , american novelist and poet ( born 1898 ) april 14 – laurence meynell ( valerie baxter , a . stephen tring ) , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1899 ) april 19 – daphne du maurier , english novelist ( born 1907 ) may 19 – c . l . r . james , trinidad-born american journalist ( born 1901 ) may 20 – erzsébet galgóczi , hungarian novelist , playwright and screenwriter ( born 1930 ) july 31 – zhou yang , chinese literary theorist ( born 1908 ) august 23 – r . d . laing , scottish psychologist and author ( born 1927 ) august 26 – irving stone , american novelist ( born 1903 ) september 4 georges simenon , belgian novelist and crime writer ( born 1903 ) sir ronald syme , new zealand classicist ( born 1903 ) september 13 – aatreya , telugu screenwriter ( born 1921 ) september 15 – robert penn warren , american poet and novelist ( born 1905 ) september 30 horace alexander , english current-affairs writer and ornithologist ( born 1909 ) oskar davičo , serbian novelist and poet ( born 1909 ) october 13 – cesare zavattini , italian screenwriter ( born 1902 ) november 22 – josé guadalupe cruz , mexican comics writer ( born 1917 ) december 5 – george selden ( terry andrews ) , american children 's author ( gastrointestinal bleeding , born 1929 ) december 19 – stella gibbons , english novelist ( born 1902 ) december 22 – samuel beckett , irish-born playwright , novelist and poet ( born 1906 ) december 26 – paul jennings , english humorist ( born 1918 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : camilo josé cela europe theatre prize : peter brook camões prize ( first award ) : miguel torga . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : mandy sayer , mood indigo c . j . dennis prize for poetry : gwen harwood , bone scan kenneth slessor prize for poetry : john tranter , under berlin mary gilmore prize : alex skovron , the re-arrangement miles franklin award : peter carey , oscar and lucinda . canada . see 1989 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : jean vautrin , un grand pas vers le bon dieu prix décembre : guy dupré , les manœuvres d'automne prix médicis french : serge doubrovsky , le livre brisé prix médicis international : alvaro mutis , la neige de l'amiral . united kingdom . booker prize : kazuo ishiguro – the remains of the day carnegie medal for children 's literature : anne fine , goggle-eyes cholmondeley award : peter didsbury , douglas dunn , e . j . scovell eric gregory award : gerard woodward , david morley , katrina porteous , paul henry james tait black memorial prize for fiction : james kelman , a disaffection james tait black memorial prize for biography : ian gibson , federico garcia lorca : a life newdigate prize : jane griffiths queen 's gold medal for poetry : allen curnow 1989 whitbread awards : richard holmes , coleridge : early visions the sunday express book of the year : rose tremain , restoration . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : nancy vieira couto , the face in the water aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : anthony hecht american academy of arts and letters gold medal for fiction , isaac bashevis singer bernard f . connors prize for poetry : jorie graham , '' spring '' compton crook award : elizabeth moon , sheepfarmer 's daughter frost medal : gwendolyn brooks national book critics circle award : to the broken cord by michael dorris national book award for fiction : to spartina by john casey nebula award : elizabeth ann scarborough , the healer 's war newbery medal for children 's literature : paul fleischman , joyful noise pen/faulkner award for fiction : to dusk and other stories by james salter pulitzer prize for drama : wendy wasserstein , the heidi chronicles pulitzer prize for fiction : anne tyler – breathing lessons pulitzer prize for poetry : richard wilbur : new and collected poems whiting awards : : fiction : ellen akins , marianne wiggins : nonfiction : ian frazier , natalie kusz , luc sante , tobias wolff ( nonfiction/fiction ) : plays : timberlake wertenbaker : poetry : russell edson , mary karr , c.d . wright . japan . falcon award ( maltese falcon society of japan ) : andrew vachss for strega the japan fantasy novel award is established , with ken'ichi sakemi winning with his novel kōkyū shōsetsu . references .