Bohemond I of Antioch

early life . childhood and youth . bohemond was the son of robert guiscard , count of apulia and calabria , and his first wife , alberada of buonalbergo . he was born between 1050 and 1058—in 1054 according to historian john julius norwich . he was baptised mark , possibly because he was born at his father 's castle at san marco argentano in calabria . he was nicknamed bohemond after a legendary giant . his parents were related within the degree of kinship that made their marriage invalid under canon law . in 1058 , pope nicholas ii strengthened existing canon law against consanguinity and , on that basis , guiscard repudiated alberada in favour of a then more advantageous marriage to sikelgaita , the sister of gisulf , the lombard prince of salerno . with the annulment of his parents ' marriage , bohemond became a bastard . before long , alberada married robert guiscard 's nephew , richard of hauteville . she arranged for a knightly education for bohemond . robert guiscard was taken seriously ill in early 1073 . fearing that he was dying , sikelgaita held an assembly in bari . she persuaded robert 's vassals who were present to proclaim her eldest son , the thirteen-year-old roger borsa , robert 's heir , claiming that the half-lombard roger would be the ruler most acceptable to the lombard nobles in southern italy . robert 's nephew , abelard of hauteville , was the only baron to protest , because he regarded himself robert 's lawful heir . byzantine wars . bohemond fought in his father 's army during the rebellion of jordan i of capua , geoffrey of conversano and other norman barons in 1079 . his father dispatched him at the head of an advance guard against the byzantine empire in early 1081 and he captured valona ( now vlorë in albania ) . he sailed to corfu , but did not invade the island since the local garrison outnumbered his army . he withdrew to butrinto to await the arrival of his father 's forces . after robert guiscard arrived in the latter half of may , they laid siege to durazzo ( present-day durrës ) . the byzantine emperor alexios i komnenos came to the rescue of the town but , on 18 october , his army suffered a crushing defeat . bohemond commanded the left flank , which defeated the emperor 's largely anglo-saxon '' varangian guard '' . the normans captured durazzo on 21 february 1082 . they marched along the via egnatia as far as kastoria , but alexios 's agents stirred up a rebellion in southern italy , forcing robert guiscard to return to his realm in april . he charged bohemond with the command of his army in the balkans . bohemond defeated the byzantines at ioannina and at arta , taking control of most of macedonia and thessaly ; however , the six-month siege of larissa was unsuccessful . supply and pay problems ( and the gifts promised to deserters by the byzantines ) undermined the morale of the norman army , so bohemond returned to italy for financial support . during his absence , most of the norman commanders deserted to the byzantines and a venetian fleet recaptured durazzo and corfu . bohemond accompanied his father to the byzantine empire again in 1084 , when they defeated the venetian fleet and captured corfu . an epidemic decimated the normans and bohemond , who was taken seriously ill , was forced to return to italy in december 1084 . succession crisis . robert guiscard died at cephalonia on 17 july 1085 . orderic vitalis , william of malmesbury and other contemporaneous writers accused his widow , sikelgaita , of having poisoned robert to secure apulia for her son , roger borsa , but failed to establish her guilt . she persuaded the army to acclaim roger borsa his father 's successor and they hurried back to southern italy . two months later , the assembly of the norman barons confirmed the succession , but bohemond regarded himself his father 's lawful heir . he made an alliance with jordan of capua , and captured oria and otranto . bohemond and roger borsa met at their father 's tomb at venosa to reach a compromise . under the terms of their agreement , bohemond received taranto , oria , otranto , brindisi and gallipoli , but acknowledged roger borsa 's succession . bohemond renewed the war against his brother in the autumn of 1087 . the ensuing civil war prevented the normans from supporting pope urban ii , and enabled the brothers ' uncle , roger i of sicily , to increase his power . bohemond captured bari in 1090 and before long , took control of most lands to the south of melfi . first crusade . in 1097 , bohemond and his uncle roger i of sicily were attacking amalfi , which had revolted against duke roger , when bands of crusaders began to pass on their way through italy to constantinople . it is possible that bohemond had religious reasons for joining the first crusade . it is equally likely that he saw in the first crusade the chance to gain a lordship in the middle east . lilie details that bohemond 's '' father 's second marriage deprived him of future prospects , '' in norman italy . while he was well known as a warrior , bohemond 's lordship in italy was small . geoffrey malaterra bluntly states that bohemond took the cross with the intention of plundering and conquering greek lands . another reason to suspect bohemond 's religious zeal is the supposed embassy bohemond sent to godfrey of bouillon , a powerful crusade leader , asking him to join forces to sack constantinople . while godfrey declined his offer , taking constantinople was never far from bohemond 's mind , as seen in his later attempt to take over the byzantine empire . he gathered a norman army , which would have been one of the smaller crusade forces with 500 knights and about 2,500-3,500 infantry soldiers , alongside his nephew tancred 's force of 2,000 men . what contributed to the norman army 's reputation as a great fighting force was their experience fighting in the east . many normans had been employed as mercenaries by the byzantine empire . others like bohemond had experience fighting the byzantines and muslim groups in the east fifteen years prior with robert guiscard . bohemond crossed the adriatic sea to constantinople along the route he had tried to follow in 1082–1084 when attacking the byzantine empire . he was careful to observe the correct attitude towards alexios along this route , which was mainly keeping his soldiers from plundering byzantine villages en route to constantinople . when he arrived at constantinople in april 1097 , he took an oath of homage to emperor alexios , which he demanded from all crusade leaders . it 's not clear what exact negotiations bohemond and alexios made concerning bohemond governing part of the eastern byzantine empire alexios hoped the crusaders would reclaim . alexios had no reason to trust bohemond enough to give him a position at the time , but hinted that he could get a position by proving his loyalty . bohemond 's best chance at gaining a favorable position was to be loyal to alexios , which he attempted to prove while the crusaders were camped around constantinople . bohemond , proficient in greek , was able to be a conduit between alexios and the crusade leaders . bohemond also attempted to prove his loyalty by convincing other crusade leaders to take the oath of homage to alexios . from constantinople to antioch , bohemond was a stand out among the leaders of the first crusade . bohemond 's reputation as an effective strategist and leader came from his fighting experience in the balkans when he took charge of his father 's army against emperor alexios ( 1082–1085 ) . there bohemond became familiar with various byzantine and muslim strategies , including an encircling strategy used by turkish forces at the siege of nicaea . mounted archers would encircle the crusader force , who would be unable to retaliate using close combat weaponry . bohemond 's familiarity with this eastern strategy allowed him to adapt quickly leading to crusader victories through antioch . the emperor 's daughter , anna comnena , leaves a portrait of him in her alexiad . she met him for the first time when she was fourteen and was seemingly fascinated by him , leaving no similar portrait of any other crusader prince . of bohemond , she wrote : now the man was such as , to put it briefly , had never before been seen in the land of the romans , be he either of the barbarians or of the greeks ( for he was a marvel for the eyes to behold , and his reputation was terrifying ) . let me describe the barbarian 's appearance more particularly – he was so tall in stature that he overtopped the tallest by nearly one cubit , narrow in the waist and loins , with broad shoulders and a deep chest and powerful arms . and in the whole build of the body he was neither too slender nor overweighted with flesh , but perfectly proportioned and , one might say , built in conformity with the canon of polycleitus . his skin all over his body was very white , and in his face the white was tempered with red . his hair was yellowish , but did not hang down to his waist like that of the other barbarians ; for the man was not inordinately vain of his hair , but had it cut short to the ears . whether his beard was reddish , or any other colour i can not say , for the razor had passed over it very closely and left a surface smoother than chalk . his blue eyes indicated both a high spirit and dignity ; and his nose and nostrils breathed in the air freely ; his chest corresponded to his nostrils and by his nostrils.the breadth of his chest . for by his nostrils nature had given free passage for the high spirit which bubbled up from his heart . a certain charm hung about this man but was partly marred by a general air of the horrible . he was so made in mind and body that both courage and passion reared their crests within him and both inclined to war . his wit was manifold and crafty and able to find a way of escape in every emergency . in conversation he was well informed , and the answers he gave were quite irrefutable . this man who was of such a size and such a character was inferior to the emperor alone in fortune and eloquence and in other gifts of nature . bohemond saw the opportunity to use the crusade for his own ends at the siege of antioch . when his nephew tancred left the main army at heraclea cybistra and attempted to establish a footing in cilicia , the movement may have been already intended as a preparation for bohemond 's eastern principality . bohemond was the first to take up a position before antioch ( october 1097 ) and he played a considerable part in the siege , in gathering supplies , beating off radwan of aleppo 's attempt to relieve the city from the east , and connecting the besiegers on the west with the genoa ships which lay in the port of st simeon . due to his successful efforts bohemond was seen as the actual leader of the siege of antioch , rather than the elected leader stephen of blois , who would soon leave the siege , claiming illness . bohemond was able to make a deal with firouz , one of the commanders of the city wall to end the siege of antioch . however , he did not press to end the siege until may 1098 when learning of the approach of kerbogha with a relief army to aid antioch . he then proposed to the other crusade leaders that the leader to take antioch should be put in charge of the city as alexios ' representative tetigus had left in february 1098 . firouz led bohemond 's force up the walls of antioch , allowing the norman troops to infiltrate and ultimately capture the city . the crusaders ' troubles were not over , however , as kerbogha started his own siege on the newly crusader held antioch . bohemond was credited as the general and creator of the battle plan used to defeat kerbogha by raymond of aguilers . running very low on food and supplies bohemond took the initiative in his strategy to leave the city and attack kerbogha 's forces , leading to a victory for the crusaders . bohemond then wanted to take control of antioch for himself , but there were some problems he had to face first . raymond of toulouse , a prominent crusade leader , did not want to hand antioch over to bohemond . raymond claimed that bohemond and other leaders would be breaking their oath to alexios , which was to give any conquered lands to the byzantine empire . bohemond argued that because alexios had failed to come to the crusader 's aid at antioch that the oath was no longer valid . bohemond set himself up as the prince of antioch , and no latin crusader or byzantine force came to take it from him . raymond of toulouse decided to give up antioch to bohemond in january 1099 , as the other crusaders moved south to the capture of jerusalem . after the fall of jerusalem to the crusaders , bohemond went to jerusalem at christmas 1099 to fulfill his crusade vows . while there he took part in the installation of dagobert of pisa as patriarch of jerusalem , perhaps in order to check the growth of godfrey and his knights of lorraine 's power in the city . by submitting to the patriarch bohemond made connections to jerusalem , who could be an ally against future attacks on antioch , and to keep in the good graces of the pope . while bohemond had the fine territory , strategic position , and army necessary to found a principality in antioch , he had to face two great forces—the byzantine empire , which claimed the whole of his territories , and the strong muslim principalities in the north-east of syria . against these two forces he would ultimately fail . . wars between antioch and the byzantine empire . by 1100 , the town of malatia , which guarded one of the cilician gates through the taurus mountains , had been captured by an armenian soldier of fortune . he received reports that the danishmend gazi of sivas was preparing an expedition to capture malatia . the armenians sought help from bohemond . afraid to weaken his forces at antioch , but not wishing to avoid the chance to extend his domain northwards , in august 1100 bohemond marched north with only 300 knights and a small force of foot soldiers . failing to send scouting parties , they were ambushed by the turks and completely encircled at the battle of melitene . bohemond managed to send one soldier to seek help from baldwin of edessa but was captured . he was laden with chains and imprisoned in neo-caesarea ( modern niksar ) until 1103 . emperor alexios was incensed that bohemond had broken his oath made in constantinople and kept antioch for himself . when he heard of bohemond 's capture , he offered to redeem the norman commander for 260,000 dinars , if danishmend gazi would hand the prisoner over to byzantium . when kilij arslan i , the seljuk overlord of danishmend gazi , heard of the proposed payment , he threatened to attack unless given half the ransom . bohemond proposed instead a ransom of 130,000 dinars paid just to danishmend gazi . the bargain was concluded , and gazi and bohemond exchanged oaths of friendship . ransomed by baldwin of edessa , he returned in triumph to antioch in august 1103 . his nephew tancred had taken his uncle 's place for three years . during that time , he had attacked the byzantines , and had added tarsus , adana and massissa in cilicia to his uncle 's territory ; he was now deprived of his lordship by bohemond 's return . during the summer of 1103 , the northern franks attacked ridwan of aleppo to gain supplies and compelled him to pay tribute . meanwhile , raymond of toulouse had established himself in tripoli with the aid of alexios , and was able to check the expansion of antioch to the south . early in 1104 , baldwin and bohemond passed aleppo to move eastward and attack harran . whilst leading the campaign against harran , bohemond was defeated at balak , near raqqa on the euphrates ( see battle of harran ) . the defeat was decisive , making the great eastern principality which bohemond had contemplated impossible . it was followed by a greek attack on cilicia and , despairing of his own resources , bohemond returned to europe for reinforcements in late 1104 . it is a matter of historical debate whether his '' crusade '' against the byzantine empire was to gain the backing and indulgences of pope paschal ii . either way , he enthralled audiences across france with gifts of relics from the holy land and tales of heroism while fighting the infidel , gathering a large army in the process . henry i of england famously prevented him from landing on english shores , since the king anticipated bohemond 's great attraction to the english nobility . his newfound status won him the hand of constance , daughter of the french king , philip i . of this marriage wrote abbot suger : bohemond came to france to seek by any means he could gain the hand of the lord louis ' sister constance , a young lady of excellent breeding , elegant appearance and beautiful face . so great was the reputation for valour of the french kingdom and of the lord louis that even the saracens were terrified by the prospect of that marriage . she was not engaged since she had broken off her agreement to wed hugh , count of troyes , and wished to avoid another unsuitable match . the prince of antioch was experienced and rich both in gifts and promises ; he fully deserved the marriage , which was celebrated with great pomp by the bishop of chartres in the presence of the king , the lord louis , and many archbishops , bishops and noblemen of the realm . bohemond and constance produced a son , bohemond ii of antioch . bohemond saw the root of his problems in alexios and constantinople when it came to preserving the principality of antioch . he thought that defending antioch against alexios would not be enough , since he was greatly outnumbered by the byzantine army . instead , bohemond decided to go on the offensive and attack the byzantine empire at its core in constantinople . bohemond was then resolved to use his newly recruited army of 34,000 men not to defend antioch against the greeks , but to attack alexios . w . treadgold , a history of the byzantine state and society , 626 bohemond took a similar route that was successful for his father in illyria and greece . alexios , aided by the venetians , proved to be much stronger than when he faced bohemond and robert guiscard in 1082–1084 . alexios was used to norman battle tactics and their strength , and decided on a war of attrition rather than face them head on . while the normans laid siege to dyrrhachium , alexios blockaded the norman camp until bohemond was forced to negotiate . bohemond had to submit to a humiliating peace , all his ambitions destroyed . under the treaty of devol in 1108 , he became the vassal of alexios with the title of sebastos , consented to receive alexios ' pay , and promised to cede disputed territories and to admit a greek patriarch into antioch . henceforth , bohemond was a broken man . he died six months later without returning to antioch . albert of aix records his death at bari ( albericus aquensis ii.xi , p . 177 ) . with one last jab at alexios , by not returning to antioch the treaty of devol became null and void as it only applied to bohemond himself . antioch was left in norman hands with bohemond 's nephew tancred . bohemond was buried at canosa in apulia , in 1111 . . bohemond i in literature and media . the anonymous gesta francorum was written by one of bohemond 's followers . the alexiad of anna comnena is a primary authority for the whole of his life . a 1924 biography exists by r . b . yewdale . see also the gesta tancredi by ralph of caen , which is a panegyric of bohemond 's second-in-command , tancred . his career is discussed by b . von kügler , bohemund und tancred ( 1862 ) ; while l . von heinemann , geschichte der normannen in sizilien und unteritalien ( 1894 ) , and r . röhricht 's geschichte des ersten kreuzzuges ( 1901 ) and geschichte des königreichs jerusalem ( 1898 ) may also be consulted for his history . the only major biography ( of tancred ) that exists in english is '' tancred : a study of his career and work in their relation to the first crusade and the establishment of the latin states in syria and palestine '' by robert lawrence nicholson . details of his pre-crusade career can found in geoffrey malaterra 's deeds of count roger . count bohemund by alfred duggan ( 1964 ) is a historical novel concerning the life of bohemund and its events up to the fall of jerusalem to the crusaders . evelyn waugh , '' preface '' , in alfred duggan , count bohemond ( reprint ) . london : cassell military , 2002 , pp . 5–7 . bohemond also appears in the historical novel silver leopard by f . van wyck mason ( 1955 ) , the short story '' the track of bohemond '' in the collection the road of azrael by robert e . howard ( 1979 ) and in the fantastical novel pilgermann by russell hoban ( 1983 ) . the historical fiction novel wine of satan ( 1949 ) written by laverne gay gives an embellished accounting of the life of bohemond . the crusades series by david donachie ( writing as jack ludlow ) casts bohemund as its main protagonist .