Xenocrates

life . xenocrates was a native of chalcedon . cicero , academica , i . 4 ; athenaeus , xii . ; stobaeus , ecl . phys . i . 3 ; suda , xenocrates by the most probable calculation ; comp . censorinus , c . 15 he was born 396/5 bc , and died 314/3 bc at the age of 82 . his father was named agathon or agathanor . suda encyclopedia , xi,42 moving to athens in early youth , he became the pupil of aeschines socraticus , athenaeus , ix but subsequently joined himself to plato , whom he accompanied to sicily in 361 . upon his master 's death , he paid a visit with aristotle to hermias of atarneus . strabo , xii . in 339/8 bc , xenocrates succeeded speusippus in the presidency of the school , defeating his competitors menedemus of pyrrha and heraclides ponticus by a few votes . on three occasions he was member of an athenian legation , once to philip , twice to antipater . xenocrates resented the macedonian influence then dominant at athens . soon after the death of demosthenes ( c . 322 bc ) , he declined the citizenship offered to him at the insistence of phocion as a reward for his services in negotiating peace with antipater after athens ' unsuccessful rebellion . the settlement was reached '' at the price of a constitutional change : thousands of poor athenians were disenfranchised , '' and xenocrates said '' that he did not want to become a citizen within a constitution he had struggled to prevent '' . citing and . being unable to pay the tax levied upon resident aliens , he is said to have been saved only by the courage of the orator lycurgus , plutarch , flamin . c . 12 , x . orat . vitae , 7 ; but compare phocion , c . 29 or even to have been bought by demetrius phalereus , and then emancipated . in 314/3 , he died from hitting his head , after tripping over a bronze pot in his house . xenocrates was succeeded as scholarch by polemon , whom he had reclaimed from a life of profligacy . besides polemon , the statesman phocion , chaeron ( tyrant of pellene ) , the academic crantor , the stoic zeno and epicurus are said to have frequented his lectures . wanting in quickness of apprehension and natural grace ; plutarch , conj . praec . he compensated by persevering and thorough-going industry , ; comp . plutarch , de recta rat . pure benevolence , ; aelian , varis historia , xiii . 3 purity of morals , ; plutarch , comp . cimon . c . lucullo , c . 1 ; cicero , de officiis , i . 30 ; valerius maximus , ii . 10 unselfishness , ; cicero , tusculanae quaestiones , v . 32 and a moral earnestness , which compelled esteem and trust even from the athenians of his own age . ; cicero , ad atticus , i . 15 ; plutarch , de adulat . et amic . discr . xenocrates adhered closely to the platonist doctrine , and he is accounted the typical representative of the old academy . in his writings , which were numerous , he seems to have covered nearly the whole of the academic program ; but metaphysics and ethics were the subjects which principally engaged his thoughts . he is said to have made more explicit the division of philosophy into the three parts of physics , dialectic and ethics . when alexander the great sent him 30 talents of gold , he sent it back , saying that a king , not a philosopher , needs money . . writings . with a comprehensive work on dialectic ( τῆς περὶ τὸ διαλέγεσθαι πραγματείας βιϐλία ιδ΄ ) there were also separate treatises on knowledge , on knowledgibility ( περὶ ἐπιστήμης α΄ , περὶ ἐπιστημοσύνης α΄ ) , on divisions ( διαιρέσεις η΄ ) , on genera and species ( περὶ γενῶν καὶ εἰδῶν α΄ ) , on ideas ( περὶ ἰδεῶν ) , on the opposite ( περὶ τοῦ ἐναντίου ) , and others , to which probably the work on mediate thought ( τῶν περὶ τὴν διάνοιαν η΄ ) ; comp . cicero , academica , iv . 46 also belonged . two works by xenocrates on physics are mentioned ( περὶ φύσεως ϛ΄ - φυσικῆς ἀκροάσεως ϛ΄ ) , as are also books on the gods ( περὶ θεῶν β΄ ) , ; comp . cicero , de natura deorum , i . 13 on the existent ( περὶ τοῦ ὄντος ) , on the one ( περὶ τοῦ ἑνός ) , on the indefinite ( περὶ τοῦ ἀορίστου ) , on the soul ( περὶ ψυχῆς ) , on the emotions ( περὶ τῶν παθῶν α΄ ) on memory ( περὶ μνήμης ) , etc . in like manner , with the more general ethical treatises on happiness ( περὶ εὐδαιμονίας β΄ ) , and on virtue ( περὶ ἀρετῆς ) there were connected separate books on individual virtues , on the voluntary , etc . his four books on royalty he had addressed to alexander ( στοιχεῖα πρὸς ἀλέξανδρον περὶ βασιλείας δ΄ ) . comp . plut . adv . colot . besides these he had written treatises on the state ( περὶ πολιτείας α΄ ; πολιτικός α΄ ) , on the power of law ( περὶ δυνάμεως νόμου α΄ ) , etc . , as well as upon geometry , arithmetic , and astrology . besides philosophical treatises , he wrote poetry ( epē ) and paraenesis . philosophy . epistemology . xenocrates made a more definite division between the three departments of philosophy , than speusippus , sextus empiricus , adv . math . vii . 16 but at the same time abandoned plato 's heuristic method of conducting through doubts ( aporiai ) , and adopted instead a mode of bringing forward his doctrines in which they were developed dogmatically . sextus empiricus , hypotyp . i . 2 ; comp . cicero , academica , i . 4 ; xenocrates recognized three grades of cognition , each appropriated to a region of its own : knowledge , sensation , and opinion . he referred knowledge ( episteme ) to that essence which is the object of pure thought , and is not included in the phenomenal world ; sensation ( aisthesis ) to that which passes into the world of phenomena ; opinion ( doxa ) to that essence which is at once the object of sensuous perception , and , mathematically , of pure reason - the essence of heaven or the stars ; so that he conceived of doxa in a higher sense , and endeavored , more definitely than plato , to exhibit mathematics as mediating between knowledge and sensuous perception . sextus empiricus , adv . math . vii . 147 , etc . all three modes of apprehension partake of truth ; but in what manner scientific perception ( epistemonike aisthesis ) did so , we unfortunately do not learn . even here xenocrates 's preference for symbolic modes of sensualising or denoting appears : he connected the above three stages of knowledge with the three fates : atropos , clotho , and lachesis . we know nothing further about the mode in which xenocrates carried out his dialectic , as it is probable that what was peculiar to aristotelian logic did not remain unnoticed in it , for it can hardly be doubted that the division of the existent into the absolutely existent , and the relatively existent , simplicius , in arist . categ . iii . f . 6 , b attributed to xenocrates , was opposed to the aristotelian table of categories . metaphysics . we know from plutarch plutarch , de animae procreat . e tim . that xenocrates , if he did not explain the platonic construction of the world-soul as crantor after him did , nevertheless drew heavily on the timaeus ; and further aristotle , de caelo , i . 10 , 32 , metaph . xiv . 4 that he was at the head of those who , regarding the universe as unoriginated and imperishable , looked upon the chronological succession in the platonic theory as a form in which to denote the relations of conceptual succession . plutarch unfortunately , does not give us any further details , and contented himself with describing the well-known assumption of xenocrates , that the soul is a self-moving number . plutarch , de animae procreat . e tim . , comp . aristotle , de anima , i . 2 , 4 , anal . post . ii . 4 , ib . interp . probably we should connect with this the statement that xenocrates called unity and duality ( monas and duas ) deities , and characterised the former as the first male existence , ruling in heaven , as father and zeus , as uneven number and spirit ; the latter as female , as the mother of the gods , and as the soul of the universe which reigns over the mutable world under heaven , stobaeus , ecl . phys . i . 62 or , as others have it , that he named the zeus who ever remains like himself , governing in the sphere of the immutable , the highest ; the one who rules over the mutable , sublunary world , the last , or outermost . plutarch , plat . quaest . ix . 1 ; clement of alexandria , stromata , v . 604 if , like other platonists , he designated the material principle as undefined duality , the world-soul was probably described by him as the first defined duality , the conditioning or defining principle of every separate definitude in the sphere of the material and changeable , but not extending beyond it . he appears to have called it in the highest sense the individual soul , in a derivative sense a self-moving number , that is , the first number endowed with motion . to this world-soul zeus , or the world-spirit , has entrusted - in what degree and in what extent , we do not learn - dominion over that which is liable to motion and change . the divine power of the world-soul is then again represented , in the different spheres of the universe , as infusing soul into the planets , sun and moon , - in a purer form , in the shape of olympic gods . as a sublunary daemonical power ( as hera , poseidon , demeter ) , it dwells in the elements , and these daemonical natures , midway between gods and men , are related to them as the isosceles triangle is to the equilateral and the scalene . stobaeus , ecl . phys . i . 62 ; plutarch , de orac . defect . ; cicero , de natura deorum , i . 13 the divine world-soul which reigns over the whole domain of sublunary changes he appears to have designated as the last zeus , the last divine activity . it is not until we get to the sphere of the separate daemonical powers of nature that the opposition between good and evil begins , stobaeus , ecl . phys . and the daemonical power is appeased by means of a stubbornness which it finds there congenial to it ; the good daemonical power makes happy those in whom it takes up its abode , the bad ruins them ; for eudaimonia is the indwelling of a good daemon , the opposite the indwelling of a bad one . plutarch , de isid . et os . , de orac . defect . ; aristotle , topica , ii . 2 ; stobaeus , serm , civ . 24 how xenocrates tried to establish and connect scientifically these assumptions , which appear to be taken chiefly from his books on the nature of the gods , cicero , de natura deorum , i . 13 we do not learn , and can only discover the one fundamental idea at the basis of them , that all grades of existence are penetrated by divine power , and that this grows less and less energetic in proportion as it descends to the perishable and individual . hence he also appears to have maintained that as far as consciousness extends , so far also extends an intuition of that all-ruling divine power , of which he represented even irrational animals as partaking . clement of alexandria , stromata , v . 590 but neither the thick nor the thin , to the different combinations of which he appears to have tried to refer the various grades of material existence , were regarded by him as in themselves partaking of soul ; plutarch , de fac . in orbe lunae doubtless because he referred them immediately to the divine activity , and was far from attempting to reconcile the duality of the principia , or to resolve them into an original unity . hence too he was for proving the incorporeality of the soul by the fact that it is not nourished as the body is . nemesius , de natura hominis it is probable , that , after the example of plato , he designated the divine principium as alone indivisible , and remaining like itself ; the material , as the divisible , partaking of multiformity , and different , and that from the union of the two , or from the limitation of the unlimited by the absolute unity , he deduced number , and for that reason called the soul of the universe , like that of individual beings , a self-moving number , which , by virtue of its twofold root in the same and the different , shares equally in permanence and motion , and attains to consciousness by means of the reconciliation of this opposition . aristotle , in his metaphysics , aristotle , metaph . vii.2.1028 recognized amongst contemporary platonists three principal views concerning the ideal numbers , and their relation to the ideas and to mathematical numbers : those who , like plato , distinguished ideal and mathematical numbers ; those who , like xenocrates , identified ideal numbers with mathematical numbers those who , like speusippus , postulated mathematical numbers only aristotle has much to say against the xenocratean interpretation of the theory , and in particular points out that , if the ideal numbers are made up of arithmetical units , they not only cease to be principles , but also become subject to arithmetical operations . in the derivation of things according to the series of the numbers he seems to have gone further than any of his predecessors . theophrastus , met . c . 3 he approximated to the pythagoreans in this , that ( as is clear from his explanation of the soul ) he regarded number as the conditioning principle of consciousness , and consequently of knowledge also ; he thought it necessary , however , to supply what was wanting in the pythagorean assumption by the more accurate definition , borrowed from plato , that it is only insofar as number reconciles the opposition between the same and the different , and has raised itself to self-motion , that it is soul . we find a similar attempt at the supplementation of the platonic doctrine in xenocrates 's assumption of indivisible lines . aristotle , de lin . insec . phys . ausc . vi . 2 ; comp . simplicius , in arist . phys . f . 30 in them he thought he had discovered what , according to plato , plato timaeus god alone knows , and he among men who is loved by him , namely , the elements or principia of the platonic triangles . he seems to have described them as first , original lines , and in a similar sense to have spoken of original plain figures and bodies , simplicius , in arist . de caelo convinced that the principia of the existent should be sought not in the material , not in the divisible which attains to the condition of a phenomenon , but merely in the ideal definitude of form . he may very well , in accordance with this , have regarded the point as a merely subjectively admissible presupposition , and a passage of aristotle respecting this assumption aristotle , de anima , i . 4 , extr . should perhaps be referred to him . ethics . the information on his ethics is scanty . he tried to supplement the platonic doctrine at various points , and at the same time to give it a more direct applicability to life . he distinguished from the good and the bad something which is neither good nor bad . sextus empiricus , adv . math . xi . 4 following the ideas of his academic predecessors , he viewed the good as that which should be striven after for itself , that is , which has value in itself , while the bad is the opposite of this . cicero , de legibus , i . 13 consequently , that which is neither good nor bad is what in itself is neither to be striven after nor to be avoided , but derives value or the opposite according as it serves as means for what is good or bad , or rather , is used by us for that purpose . image : xenocrates nuremberg chronicle.jpg left 180px thumb xenocrates , depicted as a medieval scholar in the nuremberg chronicle while , however , xenocrates ( and with him speusippus and the other philosophers of the older academy ) cicero , de finibus , iv . 18 , etc . would not accept that these intermediate things , such as health , beauty , fame , good destiny , etc . were valuable in themselves , he did not accept that they were absolutely worthless or indifferent . cicero , de legibus , i . 21 according , therefore , as what belongs to the intermediate region is adapted to bring about or to hinder the good , xenocrates appears to have designated it as good or evil , probably with the proviso , that by misuse what is good might become evil , and vice versa , that by virtue , what is evil might become good . cicero , tusculanae quaestiones , v . 10 , 18 . still he maintained that virtue alone is valuable in itself , and that the value of every thing else is conditional . cicero , tusculanae quaestiones , v . 10 , 18 . , comp . academica , i . 6 according to this , happiness should coincide with the consciousness of virtue , aristotle , topica , ii . 6 , vii . 1 , ib . alex . though its reference to the relations of human life requires the additional condition , that it is only in the enjoyment of the good things and circumstances originally designed for it by nature that it attains to completion ; to these good things , however , sensuous gratification does not belong . cicero , tusculanae quaestiones , v . 13 , comp . 17 , de finibus , ii . 11 ; seneca , epistulae , 85 in this sense he on the one hand denoted ( perfect ) happiness as the possession of personal virtue , and the capabilities adapted to it , and therefore reckoned among its constituent elements , besides moral actions conditions and facilities , those movements and relations also without which external good things can not be attained , clement of alexandria , stromata , ii . ; comp . cicero , de finibus , iv . 7 , v . 9 , academica , ii . 44 , 45 , tusculanae quaestiones , iv . 10 , 26 , 31 and on the other hand did not allow that wisdom , understood as the science of first causes or intelligible essence , or as theoretical understanding , is by itself the true wisdom which should be striven after by people , clement of alexandria , stromata ; cicero , academica , ii . 44 , 45 and therefore seems to have regarded this human wisdom as at the same time exerted in investigating , defining , and applying . aristotle , topica , vi . 3 how decidedly he insisted not only on the recognition of the unconditional nature of moral excellence , but on morality of thought , is shown by his declaration , that it comes to the same thing whether one casts longing eyes , or sets one 's feet upon the property of others . aelian , varia historia , xiv . 42 his moral earnestness is also expressed in the warning that the ears of children should be guarded against the poison of immoral speeches . plutarch , de audit . . mathematics . xenocrates is known to have written a book on numbers , and a theory of numbers , besides books on geometry . plutarch writes that xenocrates once attempted to find the total number of syllables that could be made from the letters of the alphabet . plutarch , quaest . conviv . according to plutarch , xenocrates result was 1,002,000,000,000 ( a '' myriad-and-twenty times a myriad-myriad '' ) . this possibly represents the first instance that a combinatorial problem involving permutations was attempted . xenocrates also supported the idea of '' indivisible lines '' ( and magnitudes ) in order to counter zeno 's paradoxes . simplicius , in arist . phys . . see also . on indivisible lines . notes . references . attribution . external links . university of st andrews , scotland , biography of xenocrates