Berliner Gramophone

history . emile berliner received u.s . patents 372,786 and 382,790 on the gramophone on november 8 , 1887 , and may 15 , 1888 , respectively . emile berliner and the birth of the recording industry at the library of congress this was before the organization of the north american phonograph company , which first produced cylinder recordings for public use , and thus berliner 's flat disc record is roughly contemporary with the exploitation of the cylinder medium , though it took longer for berliner to commence production of his discs in america . although based in washington , d.c . , berliner 's first joint venture was undertaken in germany in 1889 with the manufacturer , a maker of toys . the kämmer & reinhardt machine utilized 5-inch hard rubber discs , and some machines and discs were exported to england . an 1890 recording of twinkle , twinkle little star , likely made by berliner himself , is the oldest disc in the bbc library or in the bibliothèque nationale de france and was once touted as the oldest commercial disc in the world , though this has since been disproven . norris mcwhirter & ross mcwhirter – the guinness book of world records 1974 edition bantam books , 1974 the kämmer & reinhardt venture did not last very long , though just how long is unclear . in the early 1890s , berliner attempted to found his first american company , the american gramophone company , in new york city , but it fell apart before issuing a single machine or disc . raymond wile , '' etching the human voice : the berliner invention of the gramophone '' , arsc journal vol . 21/1 , 1990 back in washington , d.c . , berliner tried again under the name of the united states gramophone company and began to manufacture machines and 7-inch hard rubber discs in 1894 . some celluloid discs were also made . in 1895 , hard rubber was replaced by a shellac compound , which in various formulations remained the standard disc record material until the first vinyl records – initially made only for radio use and other special applications – were introduced in the 1930s . arcane radio trivia – '' the transcription disc '' beginning in 1896 , berliner 's gramophones were made by philadelphia-based machinist eldridge johnson , who added a spring motor to drive the previously hand-rotated turntable . berliner also opened an office in new york city , staffed by frank seaman and o . & nbsp ; d . ladow and organized as the national gramophone company . master recordings were made onto zinc plates , which were then electroplated and a negative-image '' mother '' made from them to stamp discs . a major reversal of berliner 's fortunes occurred when the mastering plant in washington , d.c . burned down on september 29 , 1897 , destroying a hundred unissued masters and all of his record manufacturing equipment . '' the gramophone business '' in emile berliner and the birth of the recording industry , american memory site , library of congress within a few months , however , berliner was up and running again , with some record production aspects moved to philadelphia . berliner records were short-playing . only about two minutes could comfortably fit on each single-sided 7-inch disc . the absolute maximum depended on the speed , which was not standardized and ranged from about 75 rpm to a more typical 70 rpm down to as slow as 60 rpm . during most of the 1890s , the competing small-diameter brown wax cylinder records were recorded at about 120 rpm and could play for as long as three minutes , although recordings fully that long were uncommon . at the end of the decade , cylinder record makers began a transition to higher speeds , mainly to produce louder-playing cylinders that could better compete with the considerably louder gramophone – cylinders had usually been heard through individual stethoscope-like listening tubes rather than through a horn that yielded relatively feeble sound . a new standard cylinder speed of 160 rpm was soon established , reducing the maximum playing time to a little over two minutes and losing an advantage over berliner 's discs . as the popularity of the gramophone began to pick up , berliner found himself having to deal with infringers on his patents . in 1898 , berliner shut down at least two firms that were leeching off his business models and , in the first case , products . in 1899 , berliner discovered that frank seaman was behind a machine called the zonophone that seemed an exact replica of the gramophone . furious , berliner cut off all supply to new york , which proved a fatal error . new york daily tribune , june 11 , 1900 '' suit to restrain the national corporation from the use of the word '' gramophone '' seaman countersued for breach of contract , and in june 1900 the court granted an injunction against berliner and united states gramophone company . though he would attempt in several proceedings afterward to have the injunction overturned , it was allowed to stand and it compelled emile berliner 's exit from the gramophone business in america . supreme court appellate division , eugene v . daly against frank seaman berliner transferred his patents to eldridge johnson , who then changed the name over the door to his own , though berliner retained a share in the new company . in march 1901 , johnson registered the name victor talking machine company and launched the brand later in the year . by 1905 it had regained the lead in the american disc record business , roland gelatt , the fabulous phonograph , macmillan publishing company ; second revised edition ( april 1977 ) while by 1906 seaman 's zonophone was on a receiver 's index . supreme court appellate division , eugene v . daly against frank seaman . foreign interests . in 1895 , comic billy golden introduced berliner to fred gaisberg , jerrold northrop moore – sound revolutions : a biography of fred gaisberg , founding father of commercial sound recording . sanctuary publishing ; 2nd edition ( august 1 , 1999 ) who , with barry peter owen – a trusted associate within the national gramophone company – helped to establish berliner 's overseas interests . although the german partnership with kämmer & reinhardt had long since ended , berliner still held patents in germany and england . in 1898 , owen founded the berliner subsidiary in england which eventually took the name of gramophone & typewriter ltd . ; in 1931 , this was one of the companies that was folded into emi . that same year , gaisberg established berliner 's german subsidiary as deutsche grammophon ; this was the longest-lasting record company in history under its original charter , until finally being acquired by universal music group in 1999 . gaisberg also founded a berliner subsidiary in st . petersburg , russia in 1901 . e . berliner gramophone of canada was established in 1899 . it was first located in the aqueduct street building of northern electric in montreal , and commenced marketing records and gramophones the following year . in 1904 , the company received its charter as the berliner gram-o-phone company of canada . early recordings were imported from masters recorded in the united states until a recording studio in montreal was established in 1906 . the berliner name as a record label lasted longest in canada . in 1918 , emile berliner 's son herbert berliner left berliner gram-o-phone and founded the compo company . compo company ltd . the canadian encyclopedia . retrieved on 2013-07-16 . herbert 's younger brother , edgar , continued as chief executive of berliner gram-o-phone . in 1924 , canadian berliner was bought out by usa 's victor and became victor talking machine company of canada . emile berliner died in 1929 – the same year rca bought out victor – and edgar berliner resigned from canadian rca in 1930 . berliner gram-o-phone 's facilities in montreal , a complex of buildings at 1001 rue lenoir and 1050 rue lacasse in the st-henri district , became home to rca victor canada over the next several decades , caps 2003 apn . capsnews.org . retrieved on 2013-07-16 . developing and producing such high-tech products as microwave radio relay systems , communication satellites , television broadcast equipment , etc . since the dissolution of rca in 1986 , the buildings have been turned into a multi-use office/commercial development , édifice rca . retrieved on 2018-05-10 . in which the emile berliner museum , musée des ondes émile berliner . retrieved on 2018-05-10 . documenting the history of the man , his company and the building complex , occupies part of the space . the historic studio victor located there is still an active recording studio . in french . retrieved on 2018-05-10 . . legacy and preservation . the range of material on berliner records was wider than that available from cylinder companies in the 1890s . naturally , berliner was well-supplied with the typical band and song selections commonly found on cylinders , but he also branched out into piano music , ragtime , speeches , sermons , instrumental solos and some ethnographic material on a greater scale than his competitors . from the first , berliner 's european subsidiaries were deeply invested in opera and classical music , only indirectly exploited by american cylinder companies , at least in the 1890s . documenting the output of american berliner has proved a daunting task , as original records are scarce collector 's items and the company employed a system of block numbering that seems to make little sense . although referred to commonly as '' berliner matrices '' , they are not true matrix numbers , but catalog numbers concerned with preserving the same number for each selection even if a given title was re-recorded by another artist . subsequent re-recordings are usually given a letter suffix , usually '' w-z '' for early releases . the online discographical project : early series helpfully , the recording or matrix processing date is usually inscribed in the label area , but as berliner did not employ paper labels sometimes the information is difficult to read . a simple new more or less sequential numbering system was started in march 1899 , in which every number had a leading zero ( never used previously ) and the letter suffix , when present , denoted the category , e.g . , '' a '' for marching band , '' f '' for banjo , '' n '' for vocal quartet . the online discographical project : berliner discs , later '' 0 '' prefix series berliner 's foreign matrices employed entirely different strategies , and many to most of those have been documented by discographer alan kelly . in 2014 , the emi archive trust announced an online initiative that would collect information on berliner records worldwide . they have what appears to be the largest concentration of berliner records in one place , numbering close to 18,000 items and largely collected by fred gaisberg in the early years of the company . the emi archive trust – the berliner project another large concentration of canadian berliners are held by the national library of canada , which has set up the virtual gramophone on the web to provide access to them , though their focus is primarily on canadian artists . national library of canada : the virtual gramophone . berliner recording artists . some of the notable artists who recorded for berliner include : auguste aramini john yorke atlee buffalo bill albert campbell ( singer ) george club arthur collins cousins and demoss cullen and collins charles d'almaine will f . denny diamond quartette s.h . dudley edward m . favor george j . gaskin billy golden george graham ( comic ) graus mountain choir lil hawthorne russell hunting george w . johnson dwight l . moody vess l . ossman arthur pryor dan w . quinn len spencer sousa 's band u.s . marine band . see also . emile berliner gramophone record gramophone company ( british company ) deutsche grammophon list of record labels . references . further reading . bryan , martin f . report to the phonothèque québécoise on the search for archival documents of berliner gram-o-phone co . , victor talking machine co . , r.c.a . victor co . ( montréal ) , 1899–1972 . further augmented ed . montréal : phonothèque québécoise , 1994 . 19 , 1 p . external links . emil berliner studios – the history of the record the emi archive trust – the berliner project berliner masters in the discography of american historical recordings the british library 's kämmer & reinhardt gramophone from the 1890s emile berliner and the birth of the recording industry at the library of congress