Peter of Castile

early life . peter was born in the defensive tower of the abbey of santa maría la real de las huelgas in burgos , spain . his parents were alfonso xi of castile and maria of portugal . estow 1995 , p . 30 . according to chancellor and chronicler pero lópez de ayala , he had a pale complexion , blue eyes and very light blonde hair ; he was tall and muscular . he was accustomed to long , strenuous hours of work , lisped a little and '' loved women greatly '' . he was well read and a patron of the arts , and in his formative years he enjoyed entertainment , music and poetry . he was to be married to his contemporary joan , the second daughter and favourite estow 1995 , p . 11 . of king edward iii of england ; however on their way to castile she and her retinue travelled through cities infested with the black death , ignoring townspeople who had warned them not to enter their settlements . since the plague had not yet entered england , it is likely that they underestimated the danger . joan soon contracted the disease and died estow 1995 , p . 11 . in 1348 , aged 14 . about two years later peter began his reign when almost sixteen years old . and subject to the control of his mother and her favourites . though at first controlled by his mother , peter emancipated himself with the encouragement of the minister alburquerque . . becoming attached to maría de padilla , he married her in secret in 1353 . maría turned him against alburquerque , who fled to portugal . in the summer of 1353 , the young king was practically coerced by his mother and the nobles into marrying blanche of bourbon ; he deserted her at once . this marriage necessitated peter 's denying that he had married maría , but his relationship with her continued and she bore him four children . he also apparently went through the form of marriage with juana de castro , widow of don diego de haro , convincing her that his previous marriage to queen blanche was a nullity . the bishops of avila and salamanca were asked to concur , and were afraid to say otherwise . peter and juana were married in cuellar , and juana was proclaimed queen of castile . after two nights , he then deserted her . she bore him a son who died young , after peter 's death . a period of turmoil followed in which the king was for a time overpowered and , in effect , imprisoned . the dissension within the party striving to coerce him enabled him to escape from toro , where he was under observation , to segovia . in 1361 , queen blanche died at medina sidonia . french historians claim that peter ordered two jews to murder her ; histoire de bertrand du guesclin , connestable de france et des royaumes de léon , de castille , de cordoue et de séville , duc de molines , comte de longueville '' , par messire paul hay , seigneur du chastelet , édition à paris , chez jean guignard 1666 , conservé un temps à la bibliothèque impériale de vienne ( autriche ) another version of the story says she was poisoned ; a third one that she was shot with a crossbow , tuchman 1978 , p . 228 . although it may have been the plague . also that year , maria de padilla died in seville . wars with aragon . from 1356 to 1366 , peter engaged in constant wars with aragon in the '' war of the two peters '' , in which he showed neither ability nor skill in his support of his english ally or castilian interests in the mediterranean against the french and aragonese . the king of aragon then supported peter 's bastard brothers against him . it was during this period that peter perpetrated the series of murders which made him notorious . in 1366 began the calamitous castilian civil war , which would see him dethroned . he was assailed by his bastard brother henry ii of castile at the head of a host of soldiers of fortune , including bertrand du guesclin and hugh calveley , and abandoned the kingdom without daring to give battle , after retreating several times ( first from burgos , then from toledo , and lastly from seville ) in the face of the oncoming armies . peter fled with his treasury to portugal , where he was coldly received by his uncle , king peter i of portugal , and thence to galicia , in the northern iberian peninsula , where he ordered the murder of suero , the archbishop of santiago , and the dean , peralvarez . peter and the spanish jewry . peter 's rival henry of trastámara continuously depicted peter as '' king of the jews '' , and had some success in taking advantage of popular castilian resentment towards the jews . henry of trastámara instigated pogroms beginning a period of anti-jewish riots and forced conversions in castile that lasted approximately from 1370 to 1390 . peter took forceful measures against this , including the execution of at least five anti-jewish leaders of a riot . the prominence of samuel ha-levi , king peter 's treasurer , has often been cited as evidence of peter 's supposed pro-jewish sentiment , but ha-levi 's success did not necessarily reflect the general experience of the spanish jewry in this period which was often marked by discrimination and pogroms . and even samuel 's career , including his arrest and death by torture , shows that the opportunities for jews were restricted to certain offices and positions whereas other forms of advancement were denied to them . estow 1995 , p . . death . in the summer of 1366 , peter took refuge with edward the black prince , who restored him to his throne in the following year after the battle of nájera . but he disgusted his ally with his faithlessness and ferocity , as well as his failure to repay the costs of the campaign , as he had promised to do . the health of the black prince broke down , and he left the iberian peninsula . meanwhile , henry of trastámara returned to castile in september , 1368 . the cortes of the city of burgos recognized him as king of castile . others followed , including córdoba , palencia , valladolid , and jaén . galicia and asturias , on the other hand , continued to support peter . as henry made his way toward toledo , peter , who had retreated to andalusia , chose to confront him in battle . on 14 march 1369 , the forces of peter and henry met at montiel , a fortress then controlled by the order of santiago . henry prevailed with the assistance of bertrand du guesclin . peter took refuge in the fortress , which , being controlled by a military order of galician origin , remained faithful to him . negotiations were opened between peter and his besieger , henry . peter met with du guesclin , who was acting as henry 's envoy . peter offered du guesclin 200,000 gold coins and several towns , including soria , almazan , and atienza to betray henry . ever opportunistic , du guesclin informed henry of the offer and immediately bargained for greater compensation from henry to betray peter . having made a deal with henry , du guesclin returned to peter . under the guise of accepting his deal , du guesclin led peter to his tent on the night of 23 march 1369 . henry was waiting . the historian lópez de ayala described the encounter as follows : upon entering du guesclin 's tent , henry '' saw king peter . he did not recognize him because they had not seen each other for a long time . one of bertrand 's men said 'this is your enemy . ' but king henry asked if it was he and . king peter said twice , ' i am he , i am he . ' then king henry recognized him and hit him in the face with a knife and they . fell to the ground . king henry struck him again and again . '' having dispatched his half-brother , henry left peter 's body unburied for three days , during which time it was subjected to ridicule and abuse . legacy and reputation . popular memory generally views peter as a vicious monster . much but not all of peter 's reputation comes from the works of the chronicler pero lópez de ayala , who after his father 's change of allegiance had little choice but to serve peter 's usurper . after time passed , there was a reaction in peter 's favour and an alternative name was found for him . it became a fashion to speak of him as el justiciero , the executor of justice ( the lawful ) . estow 1995 , p . xxvi . apologists were found to say that he had killed only men who would not submit themselves to the law or respect the rights of others . peter did have his supporters . even ayala confessed that the king 's fall was regretted by many , among them the peasants and burghers subjected to the nobles by late feudal gifts and by the merchants , who enjoyed security under his rule . the english , who backed peter , also remembered the king positively . geoffrey chaucer visited castile during peter 's reign and lamented the monarch 's death in the monk 's tale , part of the canterbury tales . ( chaucer 's patron , john of gaunt , 1st duke of lancaster , had fought on peter 's side in his struggle to reclaim the throne . ) the english lake poet robert southey was presented in 1818 with a copy of a five-act play by the novelist ann doherty , entitled peter the cruel , king of castile and leon . romantic circles : '' attersoll , ann . '' retrieved 11 november 2017 . peter had many qualities of those later monarchs educated in the centralization style . he built a strong royal administrative force ahead of his times . he failed to counter or check all the feudal powers that supported his rivals , however illegitimate and opposite to the principles of aristocracy they represented themselves . but his moral superiority was reduced too by the violent means , including fratricides , by which he sought to suppress opposition ; he at times was extremely despotic and unpredictable , even by the standards of his age . in this he was preceded by his father alfonso xi , who since the crisis at the death of alfonso x had faced multiple rebellions against royal authority . the death of king peter ended the traditional alliance of castile and navarre with england , which had been started by the plantagenets to keep france in check . the alliance was later renewed by the trastámaras and tudors . children . peter 's children by maría de padilla were : beatrice ( 1353–1369 ) , nun at the abbey of santa clara at tordesillas constance ( 1354–1394 ) , married john of gaunt , 1st duke of lancaster gerli & armistead 2003 , p . 215 . isabella ( 1355–1392 ) , married edmund of langley , 1st duke of york leese 2007 , p . 149 . alfonso ( 1359–1362 ) , prince of asturias ( tordesillas , 1359 19 october 1362 ) . peter forced the cortes to recognize alfonso as his legitimate heir on 29 april 1362 . however , alfonso , a very sickly child , died at the age of three , months from his recognition as crown prince . peter had one son with juana de castro , daughter of pedro fernández de castro : john ( 1355–1405 ) , married doña elvira de eril , had issue : pedro ( died 1461 ) bishop of osma and palencia . peter had a daughter with teresa de ayala , a niece of pero lopez de ayala : maria de ayala , who with her mother had long careers at the dominican convent of santo domingo el real in toledo and maintained a friendly correspondence with the trastámaras . peter with isabel de sandoval : sancho de castilla ( 1363-1370 ) , diego de castilla ( 1365-1440 ) , whose grandson pedro de castilla y fonseca '' el mozo '' was lover to the queen joan of portugal . juan castilla house of ivrea-castile . sources . the great original but hostile authority for the life of peter the cruel is the chronicle of the chancellor pedro lópez de ayala ( 1332–1407 ) . to put that in perspective are a biography by prosper mérimée , histoire de don pedro i , roi de castille ( 1848 ) and a modern history setting peter in the social and economic context of his time by clara estow ( pedro the cruel of castile ( 1350–1369 ) , 1995 ) . strictly speaking , peter was not defeated by henry but by the opposing aristocracy ; the nobles accomplished their objective of enthroning a weaker dynasty ( the house of trastámara ) , much more amenable to their interests . most of the bad stories about peter are likely to be colored by black legend , coined by his enemies , who finally succeeded in their rebellion . the chancellor lópez de ayala , the main source for peter 's reign , was the official chronicler of the trastámara , a servant of the new rulers and of peter 's aristocratic adversaries . the change of dynasty can be considered as the epilogue of the first act of a long struggle between the castilian monarchy and the aristocracy ; this struggle was to continue for more than three centuries and come to an end only under charles i of spain , the grandson of ferdinand ii of aragon ( ferdinand v of castile ) and isabella i of castile ( the catholic monarchs ) , in the first quarter of the 16th century . see also . don pèdre , roi de castille , play by voltaire elio the fugitive . notes .