Battle of Guadalete

sources . the primary source for the battle is the chronicle of 754 , which was written shortly after 754 probably in the vicinity of toledo . roger collins ( 1989 ) , the arab conquest of spain , 710 & ndash ; 97 ( london : blackwell publishing ) , 26 & ndash ; 27 , argues for its toledan provenance , but others have suggested córdoba or even syria . a full study of the mozarabic chronicle is given in carmen cardelle de hartmann ( 1999 ) , '' the textual transmission of the mozarabic chronicle of 754 '' , early medieval europe , 8 ( 1 ) , 13 & ndash ; 29 . the latin chronicle was written by a mozarab christian . the only other latin christian source written within a century of the battle is the historia langobardorum of paul the deacon . paul , vi.xlvi , only adds the fact that the '' saracens '' came to hispania from ceuta . paul was neither visigothic nor hispanic , but was writing probably in montecassino between 787 and 796 , where many visigothic monks had taken refuge . the chronicle of 741 is a near-contemporary hispanic source , but it contains no original material pertaining to the battle . several later latin christian sources contain descriptive accounts of the battle that have sometimes been trusted by historians , most notably the chronicle of alfonso iii , written by alfonso iii of asturias in the late ninth century . the high medieval accounts , such as that of lucas de tuy , are generally untrustworthy , containing much legend and invention . besides the latin christian sources there are several arabic language sources widely used by historians , but increasingly coming under heavy criticism . in the nineteenth century , reinhart dozy compared them to the thousand and one nights . more recently , collins ( 1989 ) , has compared them to the chanson de roland for french history ( p . 34 ) or the lebor na cert and cogadh gaedhel re gallaibh for irish history ( p . 5 ) , in terms of historical value . none of them predates the mid-ninth century , the date of the earliest , the futūh miṣr of ibn ʿabd al-ḥakam ( c.803 & ndash ; 71 ) , which was composed in egypt . charles cutler torrey , trans . ( 1922 ) , the history of the conquest of egypt , north africa and spain : known as the futūh miṣr of ibn ʿabd al-ḥakam ( yale university press ) ; also john harris jones , trans . ( 1858 ) , history of the conquest of spain ( göttingen : w . fr . kaestner ) , pp . 18 & ndash ; 22 excerpted at ibn abd-el-hakem : the islamic conquest of spain from medieval sourcebook . this account , more rich in detail than the mozarabic chronicle , is at odds with not only the later latin histories , but also the later arabic ones : the anonymous compilation called the akhbār majmūʿa , the late tenth-century work of ibn al-qūṭiyya ( '' the son i.e . descendant of the goth i.e . wittiza '' ) , the eleventh-century historian ibn hayyān , the thirteenth-century complete history of ibn al-athir , the fourteenth-century history of ibn khaldūn , or the early modern work of al-maqqarī . for an assessment of the value of these sources for the period of the conquest of gothic hispania , see collins ( 1989 ) , 1 & ndash ; 5 . the akhbar majmu'ah in particular was upheld by claudio sánchez-albornoz as a genuine eighth-century work surviving only in later copies , but this view has since been refuted . collins ( 1989 ) , 3 . the french orientalist évariste lévi-provençal on the other hand advocated ibn hayyān as the supreme muslim historian of the era ( and the battle ) . collins ( 1989 ) , 2 note 3 and 3 note 5 summarises some debate concerning the arab sources . among modern anglo-american historians , roger collins , r . a . fletcher , e . a . thompson , and kenneth baxter wolf are sceptical of the arabic sources and rely more on the mozarabic chronicle . historians thomas f . glick and bernard bachrach are less sceptical . collins in particular rejects a syncretistic approach incorporating information from all the available sources . background . though the reign of roderic is traditionally dated to 710 & ndash ; 11 , a literal reading of the mozarabic chronicle of 754 indicates 711 & ndash ; 12 . roderic did not rule unopposed , however . the nature of his accession on the death of wittiza from natural causes or through his assassination , is not clear from the sources . it is possible that roderic was probably the dux ( duke ) of baetica before coming to the throne . bernard f . reilly ( 1993 ) , the medieval spains ( cambridge : cambridge university press ) , 49 & ndash ; 50 . archaeological evidence and two surviving lists of kings show that one achila ii ruled in the northeast of the kingdom at this time , but his relationship to roderic is unknown . probably they were rivals who never actually came into open conflict , due to the shortness of roderic 's reign and his preoccupation with muslim raids . even with roderic 's sphere of influence ( the southwest ) and his capital toledo , he was not unopposed after his '' usurpation '' ( the mozarabic chronicle calls it an '' invasion '' ) . collins ( 1989 ) , 28 , and ( 2004 ) , visigothic spain , 409 & ndash ; 711 ( london : blackwell publishing ) , 130 & ndash ; 2 , provides a summary of the disputed succession . the battle of guadalete was not an isolated berber attack but followed a series of raids across the straits of gibraltar from north africa which had resulted in the sack of several south iberian towns . berber forces had probably been harassing the peninsula by sea since the conquest of tangiers in 705/6 . some later arabic and christian sources present an earlier raid by a certain ṭārif in 710 and one , the ad sebastianum recension of the chronicle of alfonso iii , refers to an arab attack incited by erwig during the reign of wamba ( 672 & ndash ; 80 ) . and two reasonably large armies may have been in the south for a year before the decisive battle was fought . collins ( 2004 ) , 139 . these were led by ṭāriq ibn ziyad , and others , under the overall command of mūsā ibn nuṣayr . '' taric abuzara '' and '' others '' come from the mozarabic chronicle , see collins ( 1989 ) , 30 . ṭāriq , which means '' chief '' , is considered an etymological invention by joaquín vallvé ( 1989 ) , '' nuevas ideas sobre la conquista árabe de españa : toponimia y onomástica '' , al-qantara , 10:1 , 51 & ndash ; 150 . for the others that accompanied ṭāriq & mdash ; abdelmelic , alcama , and mugheith & mdash ; see dykes shaw ( 1906 ) , '' the fall of the visigothic power in spain '' , the english historical review , 21:82 ( april ) , 222 . most of the arabic and berber accounts agree that ṭāriq was a berber military leader from northern africa . ignacio olagüe , in the islamic revolusion in the west , argues ṭāriq to have been a goth and the nominal governor of tingitania . ignacio olagüe ( 2004 1974 ) , la revolución islámica en occidente ( editorial plurabelle ) , 274 & ndash ; 75 . on this view , ṭāriq was a christian ( initially ) . a response to olagüe can be found in dolores bramon ( 2001 ) , '' dispatares sobre el islam en españa '' , webislam , opinión , no . 117 . others have argued that ṭāriq was jewish , norman roth ( 1976 ) , '' the jews and the muslim conquest of spain , '' jewish social studies , 38 ( 2 ) , 146 & ndash ; 148 . persian georges bohas , '' tariq ibn ziyad , '' encyclopædia universalis , accessed 18 october 2009 . or turk . étienne copeaux , l'image des arabes et de l'islam dans les manuels d'histoire turcs depuis 1931 , « cahiers d'études sur la méditerranée orientale et le monde turco-iranien » ( cemoti ) , 1991 , vol . 12 , n° 1 , p . 198 . according to all sources , the earliest being paul the deacon , ṭāriq left from ceuta ( septem ) and landed at the rock of calpe , the later gibraltar , which arabic sources derive from jebel tariq , '' rock of ṭāriq '' . e . a . thompson ( 1969 ) , the goths in spain ( oxford : clarendon press ) , 250 & ndash ; 51 . a legend first recorded by al-idrīsī has it that ṭāriq burned his boats after landing . from gibraltar he moved to conquer the region of algeciras and then followed the roman road that led to seville . thomas f . glick ( 1979 ) , islamic and christian spain in the early middle ages : comparative perspectives on social and cultural formation ( princeton : princeton university press ) , 32 . ṭāriq landed on 28 april 711 . according to ibn ʿabd al-ḥakam writing around 860 , ṭāriq , commander of the berber garrison of tangiers , crossed the straits with ships from a certain count julian ( arabic ilyan ) , lord of ceuta and '' alchadra '' ( algeciras ) , and landed near cartagena , which he took and made his headquarters . collins ( 2004 ) , 134 . according to the mozarabic chronicle , mūsā crossed the gaditanum fretum ( strait of cádiz ) with a large force in 711 in the buildings of justinian of procopius the term gaditanum fretum is synonymous with straits of gibraltar and need not imply that mūsā landed at cádiz ( ancient gades ) itself . and remained in hispania for fifteen months , but it is unclear from the sources if he came before or after the battle of guadalete , which was fought by the forces of his subordinates . during his time in the peninsula it was racked by civil war ( intestino furore confligeratur , '' internal frenzy '' , to the mozarabic chronicler ) , cities were razed and many people slaughtered in the general destruction . later arabic sources state that mūsā only went to hispania after news of ṭāriq 's success reached him . he flogged his subordinate in front of his soldiers and then the two together completed the conquest of the peninsula before mūsā was recalled by the caliph to damascus , a fact confirmed by the mozarabic chronicle . mūsā took with him ṭāriq and many visigothic prisoners from the taking of toledo ( collins 1989 , 29 & ndash ; 31 ) . according to al-maqqarī , roderic was fighting the basques when he was recalled to the south to deal with an invasion . roger collins ( 1986 ) , the basques ( londong : blackwell publishing ) , 97 . the most specific accounts place roderic in the vicinity of pamplona ( shaw , 223 ) . there is also the record of a byzantine attack on southern iberia that was repulsed by theudimer some years before the fall of the visigothic kingdom . this has led to theories that the berber attacks may have been related to the byzantine operation , and that perhaps the arabs were originally useful allies in a byzantine attempt to reconquer the lost province of spania . bernard s . bachrach ( 1973 ) , '' a reassessment of visigothic jewish policy , 589 & ndash ; 711 '' , the american historical review , 78:1 ( february ) , 32 . this theory is predicated on a certain understanding of the identity of the mysterious count julian ( see '' legend '' below ) . thompson , 250 , is explicit that nothing is known of the context of these byzantine raids . the author of the late asturian chronica prophetica ( 883 ) dates the first invasion of spain to '' the ides of november in the year 752 era '' , that is , 11 november 714 . kenneth baxter wolf , ed . ( 2008 ) . chronica prophetica . medieval texts in translation . he also identified two invasions , the first by an abu zubra and the second , a year later , by ṭāriq ; probably he has divided the historical figure ṭāriq ibn ziyad into two persons . date and place . the date of the battle is traditionally 711 , though this is not the date given by the mozarabic chronicle . the chronicle dates it to 712 and places it before the conquest of toledo , which it attributes to mūsā in 711 . if this discrepancy is solved by preferring the chronicler 's order to his dating , then the battle occurred in 712 and the fall of toledo later that same year . collins ( 2004 ) , 135 . later arabic accounts give an exact date of 25 or 26 july . bachrach ( 1973 ) , 32 . a more rough dating is between 19 and 23 july . glick , 32 . some accounts say the battle began on the 19th and lasted one week . shaw , 224 , suspects that many skirmishes preceded the definitive battle ( probably on the 25th or 26th ) . according to david levering lewis , the battle took place on 19 july 711 . preceding the battle was an entire week of inconclusive skirmishes near the lake la janda , in the plain stretching from the río barbate to the río guadalete . david levering lewis ( 2008 ) , god 's crucible : islam and the making of europe , 570 & ndash ; 1215 ( w.w . norton & co . ) , 123 & ndash ; 24 . according to ʿabd al-ḥakam , ṭāriq was marching from cartagena to córdoba & mdash ; after defeating a gothic army that tried to stop him & mdash ; when he met roderic in battle near shedunya , probably modern medina sidonia . the later arab accounts , most of them generating from al-ḥakam 's , also place the battle near medina sidonia , '' near the lake '' or wadilakka ( river lakka ) , often identified as the guadalete river , la janda lake , for this , see glick , 31 . stream of '' beca '' , for the theory that guadabeca became guadaleca and finally guadalete , see shaw , 223 . or the barbate river as in william e . watson ( 1993 ) , '' the battle of tours-poitiers revisited '' , providence : studies in western civilization , 2 . ( that is , their associated valleys ) . the earliest christian source , and the nearest source in time to the events , says that it took place near the unidentified '' transductine promontories '' ( transductinis promonturiis ) . thomas hodgkin , probably following rodrigo jiménez de rada , placed the battle at jerez de la frontera . thomas hodgkin ( 1887 ) , '' visigothic spain '' , the english historical review , 2:6 ( april ) , 233 . rodrigo states that the battle took place ad fluvium qui guadalete dicitur , prope assidonam quae nunc xeres dicitur : at the river called guadalete , beside sidonia , now called xeres ( quoted in shaw , 223 n42 ) . '' sidonia '' , probably the roman caesaris asidona became xeres-sidonia to the arabs and thence jerez de la frontera . joaquín vallvé , studying toponymy , puts the engagement on the banks of the guadarranque , which he says might derive from wad al-rinq ( roderic 's river ) . glick , 32 . . engagement . the armies that met in battle on the day that decided the fate of the gothic kingdom in spain are not reliably described in the surviving records . glick surmises that the muslim army was predominantly berber cavalry under berber leadership . the arabic sources traditionally give roderic 100,000 troops , gathered during his return to the south after confronting the basques . other estimates include 60,000 and 90,000 ; ibn khaldūn gives the low figure of 40,000 . these troops massed on the plain of secunda on the western bank of the guadalquivir opposite córdoba , later called the campo de la verdad ( field of truth ) . this number is outrageously high ; it complements the figure of 187,000 for the muslims provided by the ad sebastianum version of the chronicle of alfonso iii . ṭāriq is said to have landed with 7,000 horsemen and requested 5,000 more from mūsā . there could thus have been as many as 12,000 muslim fighters at the battle . glick , 32 , notes that an army of 10 & ndash ; 15,000 would have required more than three months to ferry across the straits , thus explaining the delay between ṭāriq 's reported landing and his march north in the traditional accounts . one modern estimate , disregarding the primary source claims , suggest a quarter of the 7,500 reported in one of them ; this would be approximately 2,000 . collins ( 2004 ) , 141 . the visigothic forces were '' probably not much larger '' , and the visigothic kingdom was , unlike francia to its north , not organised for war . a small number of elite clans ( perhaps around twenty five ) , their warrior followings , the king and his personal following , and the forces that could be raised from the royal fisc constituted the troops upon which roderic could draw . the defeat of the visigothic army followed on the flight of the king 's opponents , who had only accompanied the host '' in rivalry '' , '' deceitfully '' , and '' out of ambition to rule '' says the mozarabic chronicler . collins ( 1989 ) , 28 . the story of sisibert abandoning roderic with the right wing of the host is a legend . estimating visigothic forces at 33,000 , david lewis recounts how the muslim army engaged in a series of violent hit and run attacks , while the visigothic lines maneuvered en masse . a cavalry wing that had secretly pledged to rebel against roderic stood aside , giving the enemy an opening . ṭāriq 's cavalry , the mujaffafa , forming as much as a third of the total force and armored in coats of light mail and identifiable by a turban over a metal cap , exploited the opening and charged into the visigothic infantry , soon followed by the infantry . the christian army was routed and the king slain in the final hours of battle . the engagement was a bloodbath : visigothic losses were extremely high , and the muslims lost as many as 3,000 men , or a quarter of their force . david lewis , 123 & ndash ; 124 . it is possible that his enemies intended to abandon roderic on the field , to be defeated and killed by the muslims . whatever the case , their plan failed , for they too were largely slain . by another text from the mozarabic chronicle the treachery can be placed at roderic 's feet . he '' lost his kingdom together with his patria with the killing of his rivals '' . this unclear passage could indicate that roderic had killed his rivals and weakened his army , ensuring defeat , or that his rivals too died in the battle or its retreat . the chronicler may be blaming the defeat on factionalism . the chronicle of alfonso iii , in both its versions , blames the anonymous '' sons of wittiza '' for conspiring against roderic . according to rafael altamira y crevea , the '' connexion between the muslims and the sons of wittiza is confirmed by all the chroniclers , and forms a trustworthy starting-point for the history of the invasion , '' cited in bachrach ( 1973 ) , 33n86 , who finds it tempting to place the muslims , the native jewry , and achila ii , whom he reckons a son of wittza , in a tripartite alliance against roderic . collins ( 2004 ) , 137 & ndash ; 138 , rejects any attempt to salvage the historicity of the sons of wittiza from contradictions in the primary source . thompson , 251 , records '' presumably he was opposed by another member of the aristocracy or by a relative of wittiza '' . oppa , wittiza 's historical brother , was found in toledo , possibly as king-elect , by mūsā when he took the city . this oppa may have had a part to play in the opposition to roderic , but certainly not his nephews , who would have been too young to participate in power politics in 711 . the metropolitan of toledo , sindered , fled the city at the coming of the muslims , and remained for the rest of his life an exile in rome . the author of the mozarabic chronicle caustically notes that he was '' an hireling , and not the shepherd '' ( quoting jesus , gospel of john 10:12 ) . the gothic nobleman theudimer made an alliance with the conquerors to preserve his own rule of his territory . for a general discussion of military arrangements in late visigothic and post-visigothic spain until the carolingian reconquest , see joaquín vallvé ( 1978 ) , '' españa en el siglo viii : ejército y sociedad '' , al-andalus , 43 ( 1 ) , pp . 51 & ndash ; 112 . within a decade all of the peninsula save the tiny kingdom of asturias and the mountain-dwelling basques was under muslims dominion and they had advanced beyond the pyrenees as well . cause of muslim victory . the later arabic historians universally credit their religion for the victory . collins ( 2004 ) , 135 and 139 ; collins ( 1989 ) , 1 & ndash ; 6 and 31 . al-maqqarī , in the breath of perfumes , places in the mouth of ṭāriq a morale-boosting address to his soldiers on the eve of battle , which closes with this exhortation to kill roderic : according to later traditions , indigenous iberian jews , progressively disenfranchised under the rule of christian monarchs and bishops , wolfram drews ( 2002 ) , '' jews as pagans ? polemical definitions of identity in visigothic spain '' , early medieval europe , 11 ( 3 ) , 189 & ndash ; 207 , provides a good overview of the treatment of the jews in spain . for the involvement of the church , and especially of julian of toledo , in the jewish persecutions of the late seventh century , see francis x . murphy ( 1952 ) , '' julian of toledo and the fall of the visigothic kingdom in spain '' , speculum , 27 ( 1 ) , 1 & ndash ; 27 . bernard s . bachrach ( 1977 ) , early medieval jewish policy in western europe ( minneapolis : university of minnesota press ) , 23 & ndash ; 25 , deduces reasons from later medieval christian chroniclers for believing roderic 's predecessor wittiza to have been mild in his policies towards the jews , thus provoking opposition . provided fighters to augment the moorish forces . kaula al-yahudi distinguished himself in the battle at the head of a mixed contingent of jews and berbers , jewish encyclopedia , s.v . '' kaula al-yahudi '' . according to the compiler of the akhbar majmu'ah . arie schippers ( 1994 ) , '' the jews in muslim spain '' , spanish hebrew poetry and the arabic literary tradition : arabic themes in hebrew andalusian poetry , 43 . in the aftermath of victory , the jews reputedly took several cities and were even commissioned to garrison seville , córdoba , and toledo itself . thompson remarks that '' whatever the reason for the goths ' persecution of the jews , it may have contributed to the utter destruction of those who initiated and enforced it . '' thompson , 316 ; bachrach ( 1977 ) , 26 , agrees . despite all this , the participation of jews on the side of the muslims is not recorded in the mozarabic chronicle . the traditional explanation for the rapid fall of the visigothic kingdom has been decadence . this view was influentially expounded in english by the presbyterian reverend dykes shaw ( 1906 ) , '' the fall of the visigothic power in spain '' , the english historical review , 21:82 ( april ) , 209 & ndash ; 228 . the late ninth-century chronica prophetica indeed blames the goths ' defeat on their lack of penance for their sins : '' the city of toledo , victor of all peoples , succumbed as a victim to the triumphant ishmaelites , and deserved to be subjected to them . thus spain was ruined for its disgusting sins , in the 380th year of the goths . '' this is not accepted by specialists today , though it still exerts heavy influence through tertiary accounts , especially in spanish language historiography . legend . among the legends which have accrued to the history of the battle , the most prominent is that of count julian , who , in revenge for the impregnation of his daughter florinda ( the later cava rumía or doña cava ) by roderic while the young woman was being raised at the palace school , supposedly lent ṭāriq the necessary ships for launching an invasion . shaw , 221 , writing in 1906 , rejects this as legend from the late ninth- and tenth-century arabic histories . the first latin chronicler to pick it up was the monk of silo in 1110 . it blossomed under pedro del corral ( who in the fifteenth century invented '' floresinda '' , an authentic gothic name ) and miguel de luna ( who in the sixteenth turned her into a meretrix ) . that the arabs already possessed sufficient naval forces in the western mediterranean is attested by their activities against the balearic islands . while the impregnation ( and the name of his daughter ) are universally disregarded , the count julian of the arabic histories ibn khaldūn calls him a christian berber , loyal follower ( fidelis ) of wittiza , and finally emir of the gūmara tribe . sánchez-albornoz agreed ( glick , 32n36 ) . has been identified with a berber catholic named urban who appears in the mozarabic chronicle . the passage mentioning urban is quoted in shaw , 221 note 38 : quod ille consilio nobilissimi viri urbani , africanae regionis sub dogmate catholicae fidei exorti or exarci , qui cum eo cunctas hispaniae adventaverat patrias . this urban accompanied mūsā across the straits . urban may be the julian of legend , but more likely julian is the legend of urban . collins ( 1989 ) , 36 . according to one interpretation of the urban-julian legend , he was a byzantine governor of ceuta who joined with the arabs to raid the southern coasts of iberia in 710 with ṭārif . glick has suggested that ṭārif is an invention designed to explain the etymology of tarifa , the ancient julia traducta , of which '' julian '' was probably the ( unnamed ) gothic count ( comes julianus ) . glick , 32 . tarīfa means '' point '' in arabic , a reference to its place as the southern tip of hispania . according to vallvé , based on a theoretical confusion in the arabic source between the bay of cádiz and that of algeciras , '' julian '' , a goth , was the governor of cádiz . vallvé 's ideas are not widely accepted . the '' sons of wittiza '' that figure so prominently in later christian sources , are likewise unhistorical . wittiza , who is praised by the mozarabic chronicle , is almost universally vilified in subsequent works , beginning with the chronicle of moissac around 818 . the outrageousness of the accusations is proportional to the chronological distance of the narrative . thus , lucas de tuy , writing in the late thirteenth century , portrays a monster , while rodrigo jiménez de rada , rectifying the disparate accounts , shows wittiza commencing his reign with promise and evolving into a tyrant . hodgkin , 234 , who quotes extensively from felix dahn , könige der germanen , vi , 2nd ed . both appear sceptical of the later ( post-eighth century ) sources . the monk of silos around 1115 recorded that the sons of wittiza fled from roderic to julian and enlisted his aid . shaw , 222 . among the other legends surrounding the battle is that of roderic 's arrival at the field in a chariot drawn by eight white mules . concerning the conquest are the legends of the sealed chamber in toledo ( '' la maison fermée de tolède '' ) and the table ( or carpet , depending on the translation ) of solomon that ʿabd al-ḥakam alleges was also discovered in toledo . roderic 's golden sandal was allegedly recovered from the guadalete river . the nineteenth-century american military history writer henry coppée penned a history of the conquest which incorporates and retells many of the legends . history of the conquest of spain by the arab-moors : with a sketch of the civilization which they achieved and imparted to europe ( boston : little , brown , & company , 1881 ) . . notes . external links . charles morris , '' the battle of the guadalete '' , historical tales : spanish , philadelphia : j . b . lippincott company , 1898 .