1990 in literature

events . march – anton chekhov 's play three sisters opens at the gate theatre in dublin with locally born sinéad , sorcha and niamh cusack in the title rôles and their father cyril cusack as dr . chebutykin . march 20 – stephen blumberg is arrested for stealing more than 23,600 books in north america . c . june – j . k . rowling has the idea for harry potter while on a train from manchester to london : '' i was staring out the window , and the idea for harry just came . he appeared in my mind 's eye , very fully formed . the basic idea was for a boy who did n't know what he was . '' she begins writing harry potter and the philosopher 's stone , which will be completed in 1995 and published in 1997 . october – nicci gerrard marries sean french in the london borough of hackney , to make up a writing team known as nicci french . uncertain date – austrian writer ernest bornemann is awarded the first magnus hirschfeld medal for sexual research . new books . fiction . felipe alfau – chromos ( completed 1948 ) iain m . banks – use of weapons greg bear – heads and queen of angels thomas berger – orrie 's story louis de bernières – the war of don emmanuel 's nether parts william boyd – brazzaville beach ray bradbury – a graveyard for lunatics john bradshaw – homecoming a.s . byatt – possession ( 1990 booker prize winner ) tom clancy – clear and present danger hugh cook – the wazir and the witch and the wishstone and the wonderworkers bernard cornwell – sharpe 's waterloo and crackdown michael crichton – jurassic park jim dodge – stone junction roddy doyle – the snapper dominick dunne – an inconvenient woman james ellroy – l.a . confidential neil gaiman – the sandman : the doll 's house ( graphic novel ; volume 2 of the sandman series ) neil gaiman and terry pratchett – good omens john kenneth galbraith – a tenured professor john gardner – brokenclaw elizabeth george – well-schooled in murder andrew greeley – the cardinal virtues peter høeg & ndash ; tales of the night ( fortællinger om natten ) elizabeth jane howard – the light years , first of the cazalet series robert e . howard , l . sprague de camp and lin carter – the conan chronicles 2 marsha hunt – joy monica hughes – invitation to the game p . d . james – devices and desires charles johnson – middle passage ( 1990 national book award for fiction ) robert jordan – the eye of the world jamaica kincaid – lucy stephen king – four past midnight and the stand ( '' the complete & uncut edition '' ) hanif kureishi – the buddha of suburbia joe r lansdale – savage season elmore leonard – get shorty robert ludlum – the bourne ultimatum ian mcewan – the innocent patrick mcgrath – spider alan moore and david lloyd – v for vendetta ( graphic novel ) brian moore – lies of silence alice munro – friend of my youth ( short stories ) tim o'brien – the things they carried orhan pamuk – the black book robert b . parker – stardust rosamund pilcher – september belva plain – harvest terry pratchett – eric and moving pictures thomas pynchon – vineland w . g . sebald – vertigo ( schwindel . gefühle ) lucius shepard – the ends of the earth danielle steel – message from nam james tiptree , jr . – her smoke rose up forever christopher tolkien ( with j . r . r . tolkien ( d . 1973 ) and alan lee ( illustrator ) ) – the war of the ring ( the history of the lord of the rings vol . 3 ; the history of middle-earth vol . 8 ) scott turow – the burden of proof john updike – rabbit at rest ( 1990 national book critics circle award for fiction ; 1991 pulitzer prize for fiction ) andrew vachss – blossom kurt vonnegut – hocus pocus harry l . watson – liberty and power john edgar wideman – philadelphia fire ( 1991 pen/faulkner award for fiction ) banana yoshimoto – amrita . children and young people . chris van allsburg – just a dream avi – the true confessions of charlotte doyle gillian cross – wolf lynley dodd - slinky malinki rumer godden – fu-dog ken kesey – little tricker the squirrel meets big double the bear jean marzollo – pretend you 're a cat terenci moix – los grandes mitos del cine ( the greatest stories of hollywood cinema ) jim murphy – the boys ' war : confederate and union soldiers talk about the civil war bill peet – cock-a-doodle dudley salman rushdie – haroun and the sea of stories dr . seuss – oh , the places you 'll go diane stanley – good queen bess : the story of elizabeth i of england jacqueline wilson – glubbslyme ( fantasy novel ) . drama . brian friel – dancing at lughnasa declan hughes – i ca n't get started john guare – six degrees of separation girish karnad – taledanda ( kannada : ತಲೆದಂಡ , death by beheading ) peter shaffer – lettice and lovage . poetry . derek walcott – omeros . non-fiction . douglas adams and mark carwardine – last chance to see bill bryson – the mother tongue : english and how it got that way judith butler – gender trouble cheikh anta diop – alerte sous les tropiques : articles 1946–1960 : culture et développement en afrique noire ( translated as towards the african renaissance : essays in african culture & development , 1946–1960 ) dougal dixon – man after man : an anthropology of the future arun shourie and sita ram goel – hindu temples : what happened to them ryszard kapuscinski – the soccer war michael lynch – scotland : a new history susan mayse – ginger : the life and death of albert goodwin james a . michener – pilgrimage raphael patai – the hebrew goddess ronald reagan – an american life barry siegel – a death in white bear lake gary snyder – the practice of the wild hans-jürgen syberberg – on the fortunes and misfortunes of art in post-war germany ( vom unglück und glück der kunst in deutschland nach dem letzten kriege ) . births . march 29 – kiran millwood hargrave , english poet , playwright and novelist . deaths . february 27 – alexandru rosetti , romanian linguist , editor and memoirist ( burns , born 1895 ) may 10 – walker percy , american novelist ( born 1916 ) may 25 – lucy m . boston , english children 's novelist ( born 1892 ) july 15 – zaim topčić , yugoslav and bosnian writer ( born 1920 ) july 22 – manuel puig , argentine novelist ( heart attack , born 1932 ) levine , suzanne jill ( 2000 ) . manuel puig and the spider woman : his life and fictions . new york : farrar , straus and giroux . p . 377 . august 25 – morley callaghan , canadian novelist , playwright and broadcasting personality ( born 1903 ) september 8 – denys watkins-pitchford , english children 's writer ( born 1905 ) september 26 – alberto moravia , italian novelist and journalist ( born 1907 ) september 30 – patrick white , australian novelist ( born 1912 ) october 23 – louis althusser , french marxist philosopher ( heart attack , born 1918 ) november 7 – lawrence durrell , english novelist , dramatist , and travel writer ( born 1912 ) november 8 – anya seton , american genre novelist ( born 1904 ) november 23 – roald dahl , welsh-born children 's author ( myelodysplastic syndrome , born 1916 ) november 24 – dodie smith , english novelist and dramatist ( born 1899 ) december 1 – irma chilton , welsh children 's writer in welsh and english ( born 1930 ) december 7 – reinaldo arenas , cuban poet , novelist , and playwright ( suicide , born 1943 ) december 11 – david turner , english dramatist ( born 1927 ) december 20 – andrea dunbar , english playwright ( born 1961 ) december 14 – friedrich dürrenmatt , swiss dramatist ( congestive heart failure , born 1921 ) uncertain date clare hoskyns-abrahall , english biographer and children 's writer ( born 1900 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : octavio paz europe theatre prize : giorgio strehler camões prize : joão cabral de melo neto . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : gillian mears , the mint lawn c . j . dennis prize for poetry : robert adamson , the clean dark kenneth slessor prize for poetry : robert adamson , the clean dark mary gilmore prize : kristopher rassemussen , in the name of the father miles franklin award : tom flood , oceana fine . canada . see 1990 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : jean rouaud , les champs d'honneur prix décembre : françois maspero , les passagers du roissy–express prix médicis french : les quartiers d'hiver – jean-noël pancrazi prix médicis international : amitav ghosh , les feux du bengale . united kingdom . booker prize : a . s . byatt , possession : a romance carnegie medal for children 's literature : gillian cross , wolf cholmondeley award : kingsley amis , elaine feinstein , michael o'neill eric gregory award : nicholas drake , maggie hannan , william park , jonathan davidson , lavinia greenlaw , don paterson , john wells james tait black memorial prize for fiction : william boyd , brazzaville beach james tait black memorial prize for biography : claire tomalin , the invisible woman : the story of nelly ternan and charles dickens queen 's gold medal for poetry : sorley maclean 1990 whitbread awards : nicholas mosley , hopeful monsters the sunday express book of the year : j . m . coetzee , age of iron . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : debra allbery , walking distance aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : w . s . merwin bernard f . connors prize for poetry : christopher logue , kings bobbitt national prize for poetry : james merrill , the inner room caldecott award : ed young , lon po po : a red–riding hood story from china compton crook award : josepha sherman , the shining falcon frost medal : denise levertov / james laughlin hugo award for best novel : dan simmons for hyperion national book award for fiction : charles johnson for middle passage nebula award : ursula k . le guin , tehanu newbery medal for children 's literature : lois lowry , number the stars pulitzer prize for drama : august wilson , the piano lesson pulitzer prize for fiction : oscar hijuelos for the mambo kings play songs of love pulitzer prize for poetry : charles simic : the world does n't end whiting awards : : fiction : yannick murphy , lawrence naumoff , mark richard , christopher tilghman , stephen wright : nonfiction : harriet ritvo , amy wilentz : plays : tony kushner : poetry : emily hiestand , dennis nurkse . elsewhere . premio nadal , juan josé millás , la soledad era esto . references .