1988 in literature

events . march 7 – nine thousand movie and television writers of the writers ' guild of america go on strike a day after rejecting a final offer from producers . strike announced by writers for tv , new york times , march 7 , 1988 may 28–31 – the first hay festival of literature is held in the welsh marches . june – the panasonic globe theatre , tokyo , opens with an ingmar bergman production of shakespeare 's hamlet . august 7 – the writers guild of america strike formally ends . writers ratify contract , ending longest strike , new york times , august 8 , 1988 . november 15 – copyright , designs and patents act 1988 reforms copyright law in the united kingdom , with special provision for great ormond street hospital for sick children to benefit in perpetuity from royalties in j . m . barrie 's 1904 play peter pan , or the boy who would n't grow up . unknown date – vasily grossman 's 1960 novel life and fate ( жизнь и судьба ) is published for the first time in the soviet union , in the magazine oktyabr . . new books . fiction . caio fernando abreu – os dragões não conhecem o paraíso ( dragons , short stories ) margaret atwood – cat 's eye bernardo atxaga – obabakoak ( short stories ) j . g . ballard memories of the space age running wild iain m . banks – the player of games clive barker cabal the hellbound heart thomas berger – the houseguest michael blake – dances with wolves dionne brand – sans souci and other stories ray bradbury – the toynbee convector orson scott card – treason peter carey – oscar and lucinda roger caron – jojo michael chabon – the mysteries of pittsburgh tom clancy – the cardinal of the kremlin paulo coelho – the alchemist hugh cook – the walrus and the warwolf bernard cornwell sharpe 's rifles wildtrack jim crace – the gift of stones tsitsi dangarembga – nervous conditions robertson davies – the lyre of orpheus l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp – the stones of nomuru don delillo – libra dương thu hương – paradise of the blind ( những thiên đường mù ) allan w . eckert – the dark green tunnel umberto eco – foucault 's pendulum ( il pendolo di foucault ) john gardner – scorpius thomas harris – the silence of the lambs joseph heller – picture this alan hollinghurst – the swimming pool library william horwood – duncton wood hamid ismailov – собрание утончённых judith krantz – 'til we meet again doris lessing – the fifth child bernard-henri lévy – les derniers jours de charles baudelaire robert ludlum – the icarus agenda javier marías – todas las almas ( all souls ) david markson – wittgenstein 's mistress james a . michener – alaska robert b . parker – crimson joy belva plain – tapestry ellis peters the confession of brother haluin a rare benedictine : the advent of brother cadfael richard powers – prisoner 's dilemma tim powers – on stranger tides terry pratchett sourcery wyrd sisters christoph ransmayr – the last world jean raspail – blue island alina reyes – the butcher david adams richards – nights below station street salman rushdie – the satanic verses richard russo – the risk pool r . a . salvatore – the crystal shard ( first of the icewind dale trilogy ) sidney sheldon – the sands of time clark ashton smith – a rendezvous in averoigne danielle steel – zoya thomas sullivan – the phases of harry moon nikolai tolstoy – the coming of the king anne tyler – breathing lessons andrew vachss – blue belle mario vargas llosa – in praise of the stepmother ( elogio de la madrastra ) banana yoshimoto – kitchen . children and young people . chris van allsburg – two bad ants martin auer – now , now , markus ( bimbo und sein vogel ) lyll becerra de jenkins - the honorable prison roald dahl – matilda janice elliott – the empty throne ( second in the sword and the dream series ) virginia hamilton ( with barry moser ) – in the beginning : creation stories from around the world william joyce – robots elizabeth laird – red sky in the morning ( also as loving ben ) geraldine mccaughrean – a pack of lies patricia mckissack – mirandy and brother wind beatrice schenk de regniers ( with eva moore et al . ) – sing a song of popcorn : every child 's book of poems christopher tolkien ( with j . r . r . tolkien and alan lee ) – the return of the shadow p . l . travers – mary poppins and the house next door manuel vázquez montalbán ( with willi glasauer ) – escenas de la literatura universal y retratos de grandes autores ( scenes from world literature and portraits of greatest authors ) . drama . alan bennett – single spies ( stage versions of an englishman abroad and a question of attribution ) thomas bernhard – heldenplatz david henry hwang – m . butterfly ann-marie macdonald – goodnight desdemona ( good morning juliet ) peter shaffer – lettice and lovage tom stoppard – hapgood botho strauß – seven doors ( sieben türen ) . poetry . giannina braschi – el imperio de los sueños ( empire of dreams ) james merrill – the inner room grazyna miller – '' curriculum '' . non-fiction . david herbert donald – look homeward : a life of thomas wolfe albert goldman – the lives of john lennon sita ram goel – catholic ashrams stephen hawking – a brief history of time k . s . lal – the mughal harem patrick macnee and marie cameron – blind in one ear : the avenger returns ( macnee 's autobiography ) lou mollgaard – alice prin rosalind miles – the women 's history of the world alanna nash – golden girl : the story of jessica savitch lady violet powell – the life of a provincial lady : a study of e . m . delafield and her works philip roth – the facts : a novelist 's autobiography miranda seymour – a ring of conspirators : henry james and his literary circle , 1895–1915 joe simpson – touching the void william l . sullivan – listening for coyote frédéric vitoux – céline : a biography ( la vie de céline ) . births . may 18 – luu quang minh , vietnamese writer and singer october 14 – ocean vuong , vietnamese-american poet unknown date – fiona mozley , english novelist and medievalist vogue interview , 16 october 2017 retrieved 24 may 2018 . . deaths . february 3 – robert duncan , american poet ( born 1919 ) february 6 – marghanita laski , english biographer , novelist and broadcaster ( born 1915 ) february 28 – kylie tennant , australian novelist , playwright and historian ( born 1912 ) march 19 – máirtín ó direáin , irish-language poet ( born 1910 ) may 3 – premendra mitra , bengali poet , novelist and short story writer ( born 1904 ) april 12 – alan paton , south african novelist and political activist ( born 1903 ) april 15 – modest morariu , romanian poet , essayist , prose writer and translator ( born 1929 ) april 21 – i . a . l . diamond , bessarabian-born american comedy writer ( born 1920 ) may 8 – robert a . heinlein , american science fiction writer ( born 1907 ) june 10 – louis l'amour , american western novelist ( born 1908 ) june 21 – george ivașcu , romanian journalist , literary critic , and communist militant ( born 1911 ) july 10 – enrique lihn , chilean poet , playwright , and novelist ( cancer , born 1929 ) july 12 – joshua logan , american stage and film writer ( born 1908 ) august 20 – joan g . robinson , english children 's writer and illustrator ( born 1910 ) august 23 – menotti del picchia , brazilian poet , journalist and painter ( born 1892 ) august 28 – max shulman , american novelist , short-story writer and dramatist ( born 1919 ) september 28 – charles addams , american cartoonist ( born 1912 ) october 1 – sacheverell sitwell , english art critic ( born 1897 ) october 16 – christian matras , faroese poet ( born 1900 ) november 2 – stewart parker , northern irish poet and playwright ( cancer , born 1941 ) december 16 – frank bonham , american western and young adult novelist ( born 1914 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : naguib mahfouz . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : tom flood , oceana fine c . j . dennis prize for poetry : judith beveridge , the domesticity of giraffes kenneth slessor prize for poetry : judith beveridge , the domesticity of giraffes mary gilmore prize : judith beveridge , the domesticity of giraffes miles franklin award : no award presented . canada . see 1988 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . grand prix de littérature policière international : andrew vachss , strega prix goncourt : érik orsenna , l'exposition coloniale prix médicis french : christiane rochefort , la porte du fond prix médicis international : thomas bernhard , les maîtres anciens . united kingdom . booker prize : peter carey , oscar and lucinda carnegie medal for children 's literature : geraldine mccaughrean , a pack of lies cholmondeley award : john heath-stubbs , sean o'brien , john whitworth eric gregory award : michael symmons roberts , gwyneth lewis , adrian blackledge , simon armitage , robert crawford james tait black memorial prize for fiction : piers paul read , a season in the west james tait black memorial prize for biography : brian mcguinness , wittgenstein , a life : young ludwig ( 1889–1921 ) queen 's gold medal for poetry : derek walcott 1988 whitbread awards : paul sayer , the comforts of madness the sunday express book of the year : david lodge , nice work . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : maxine scates , toluca street aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : richard wilbur frost medal : carolyn kizer national book award for fiction : pete dexter , paris trout national book critics circle : bharati mukherjee , the middleman and other stories nebula award : lois mcmaster bujold , falling free newbery medal for children 's literature : russell freedman , lincoln : a photobiography pen/faulkner award for fiction : t . coraghessan boyle , world 's end pulitzer prize for drama : alfred uhry , driving miss daisy pulitzer prize for fiction : toni morrison , beloved pulitzer prize for poetry : william meredith : partial accounts : new and selected poems whiting awards : fiction : lydia davis , bruce duffy , jonathan franzen , mary la chapelle , william t . vollmann . nonfiction : gerald early , geoffrey o'brien . poetry : michael burkard , li-young lee , sylvia moss . spain . premio nadal : , retratos de ambigú . references .