Culture of Wales

development of welsh culture . historical influences . wales has been identified as having been inhabited by humans for some 230,000 years , as evidenced by the discovery of a neanderthal at the bontnewydd palaeolithic site in north wales . after the roman era of occupation , a number of small kingdoms arose in what is now wales . these early kingdoms were also influenced by ireland ; but details prior to the 8th century ad are unclear . kingdoms during that era included gwynedd , powys and deheubarth . while rhodri the great in the 9th century was the first ruler to dominate a large portion of wales , it was not until 1055 that gruffydd ap llywelyn united the individual welsh kingdoms and began to annex parts of england . gruffydd was killed , possibly in crossfire by his own men , on 5 august 1063 while harold godwinson sought to engage him in battle . this was just over three years before the norman invasion of england , which led to a drastic change of fortune for wales . by 1070 , the normans had already seen successes in their invasion of wales , with gwent fallen and deheubarth plundered . the invasion was seemingly complete by 1093 . however , the welsh rebelled against their new overlords the following year , and the welsh kingdoms were re-established and most of the land retaken from the normans over the following decades . while gwynedd grew in strength , powys was broken up after the death of llywelyn ap madog in the 1160s and was never reunited . llywelyn the great rose in gwynedd and had reunited the majority of wales by his death in 1240 . after his death , king henry iii of england intervened to prevent dafydd ap llywelyn from inheriting his father 's lands outside gwynedd , leading to war . the claims of his successor , llywelyn ap gruffudd , conflicted with those of king edward i of england ; this resulted in the conquest of wales by english forces . the tudors of penmynydd grew in power and influence during the 13th to 15th centuries , first owning land in north wales , but losing it after maredudd ap tudur backed the uprising of owain glyndŵr in 1400 . maredudd 's son , owain ap maredudd ap tudur , anglicised his name to become owen tudor , and was the grandfather of henry tudor . henry took the throne of england in 1485 , at the end of the wars of the roses , when his forces defeated those of richard iii at the battle of bosworth field . the house of tudor continued to reign through several successive monarchs until 1603 , when james i ( james vi of scotland ) took the throne for the house of stuart ; his great grandmother was margaret tudor . . identity and nationalism . welsh nationalism emphasises the distinctiveness of welsh language , culture , and history , and calls for more self-determination for wales , which might include more devolved powers for the welsh assembly or full independence from the united kingdom . while a sense of nationhood has existed within wales for over 1500 years , the idea that wales should be a modern self-determining state has only been mooted since the mid-18th century . during the 15th century , owain glyndwr campaigned with initial success for wales to be reestablished as a country independent of english control . symbols . national symbols of wales include the dragon , the daffodil and the leek . legend states that the leek dates back to the 7th century , when king cadwaladr of gwynedd had his soldiers wear the vegetable during battle against saxons to make it easier to identify them . though this same story is recounted in the 17th century , but now attributed to saint david . the earliest certain reference of the leek as a welsh emblem was when princess mary , daughter of henry viii , was presented with a leek by the yeoman of the guard on saint david 's day in 1537 . the colours of the leek were used for the uniforms of soldiers under edward i of england . cadwaladr is also said to have introduced the red dragon standard , although this symbol was most likely introduced to the british isles by roman troops who in turn had acquired it from the dacians . it may also have been a reference to the 6th century welsh word draig , which meant '' leader '' . the standard was appropriated by the normans during the 11th century , and used for the royal standard of scotland . richard i of england took a red dragon standard with him on the third crusade . both symbols were popular with tudor kings , with henry vii of england ( henry tudor ) adding the white and green background to the red dragon standard . it was largely forgotten by the house of stuart , who favoured a unicorn instead . by the 17th and 18th centuries , it became common practice in great britain for the gentry to wear leeks on st . david 's day . in 1807 , a '' a red dragon passant standing on a mound '' was made the king 's badge for wales . following an increase in nationalism in 1953 , it was proposed to add the motto y ddraig goch ddyry cychwyn ( '' the red dragon takes the lead '' ) to the flag . this was poorly received , and six years later queen elizabeth ii intervened to put the current flag in place . it has been proposed that the flag of the united kingdom be redesigned to include a symbol representing wales , as it is the only nation in the united kingdom not represented in the flag . the daffodil is a more recent development , becoming popular during the 19th century . it may have been linked to the leek ; the welsh for daffodil ( cenhinen bedr ) translates as '' st peter 's leek '' . during the 20th century , the daffodil rose to rival the prominence of the leek as a symbol of wales . prime minister david lloyd george ensured that the daffodil had a place in the investiture of edward viii . the traditional welsh costume and welsh hat were well known during the 19th and early 20th centuries . queen victoria ( later queen victoria ) had a hat made for her when she visited wales in 1832 . the hat was popularised by sydney curnow vosper 's 1908 painting salem , but by then its use had declined . . language . the two main languages of wales are english and welsh . throughout the centuries , the welsh language has been a central factor in the concept of wales as a nation . undoubtedly the strongest of the celtic languages , figures released by the office of national statistics taken from the 2011 census , show that welsh is spoken by 19 % of the population . . religion . before the roman occupation , the dominant religion in wales was a pagan one , led by the druids . little is known about the traditions and ceremonies , but tacitus , whose claims were sometimes exaggerated , stated that they performed human sacrifice : he says that in ad 61 , an altar on anglesey was found to be '' drenched with the blood of their prisoners '' . christianity was introduced to wales through the romans , and after they abandoned the british isles , it survived in south east wales at hentland . in the 6th century , this was home to dubricius , the first celtic saint . the largest religion in modern wales is christianity , with almost 58 % of the population describing themselves as christian in the 2011 census . the presbyterian church of wales was for many years the largest denomination ; it was born out of the welsh methodist revival in the 18th century and seceded from the church of england in 1811 ; the church in wales had an average sunday attendance of 32,171 in 2012 . it forms part of the anglican communion , and was also part of the church of england , but was disestablished by the british government in 1920 under the welsh church act 1914 . non-christian religions have relatively few followers in wales , with muslims making up 1.5 % of the population while hindus and buddhism represent 0.3 % each in the 2011 census . over 32 % of the population in wales did not note a religion . research in 2007 by the tearfund organisation showed that wales had the lowest average church attendance in the uk , with 12 % of the population routinely attending . . festivals . the patron saint of wales is saint david , dewi sant in welsh . st . david 's day is celebrated on 1 march , which some people argue should be designated a public holiday in wales . other days which have been proposed for national public commemorations are 16 september ( the day on which owain glyndŵr 's rebellion began ) and 11 december ( the death of llywelyn ap gruffudd ) . the traditional seasonal festivals in wales are : calan gaeaf ( a hallowe'en or samhain-type festival on the first day of winter ) gŵyl fair y canhwyllau ( literally mary 's festival of the candles , i.e . candlemas ; also coinciding with imbolc ) ( translated from welsh ) calan mai ( may day , and similar to beltane ) calan awst ( 1 august , equivalent to lammas and lughnasa ) gŵyl mabsant celebrated by each parish in commemoration of its native saint , often marked by a fair dydd santes dwynwen , a welsh equivalent to st valentine 's day calennig is a welsh new year celebration . arts . visual arts . many works of celtic art have been found in wales . in the early medieval period , the celtic christianity of wales participated in the insular art of the british isles and a number of illuminated manuscripts possibly of welsh origin survive , of which the 8th century hereford gospels and lichfield gospels are the most notable . the 11th century ricemarch psalter ( now in dublin ) is certainly welsh , made in st david 's , and shows a late insular style with unusual viking influence . the best of the few welsh artists of the 16th–18th centuries tended to move elsewhere to work , but in the 18th century the dominance of landscape art in english art motivated them to stay at home , and brought an influx of artists from outside to paint welsh scenery . the welsh painter richard wilson ( 1714–1782 ) is arguably the first major british landscapist , but rather more notable for italian scenes than welsh ones , although he did paint several on visits from london . it remained difficult for artists relying on the welsh market to support themselves until well into the 20th century . an act of parliament in 1854 provided for the establishment of a number of art schools throughout the united kingdom , and the cardiff school of art opened in 1865 . graduates still very often had to leave wales to work , but betws-y-coed became a popular centre for artists , and its artists ' colony helped form the royal cambrian academy of art in 1881 . royal cambrian academy the sculptor sir william goscombe john made many works for welsh commissions , although he had settled in london . christopher williams , whose subjects were mostly resolutely welsh , was also based in london . thomas e . stephens and andrew vicari had very successful careers as portraitists , based respectively in the united states and france . sir frank brangwyn was welsh by origin , but spent little time in wales . perhaps the most famous welsh painters , augustus john and his sister gwen john , mostly lived in london and paris ; however the landscapists sir kyffin williams and peter prendergast remained living in wales for most of their lives , though well in touch with the wider art world . ceri richards was very engaged in the welsh art scene as a teacher in cardiff , and even after moving to london ; he was a figurative painter in international styles including surrealism . various artists have moved to wales , including eric gill , the london-born welshman david jones , and the sculptor jonah jones . the kardomah gang was an intellectual circle centred on the poet dylan thomas and poet and artist vernon watkins in swansea , which also included the painter alfred janes . . ceramics . historically , there were three main areas of pottery production in wales : south-west wales , northern monmouthshire and the vale of glamorgan . several further sites can be identified through their place names , for example pwllcrochan ( a hamlet near milford haven estuary in pembrokeshire ) , which translates to crock pool , and archaeology has also revealed former kiln sites across the country . these were often located near clay beds , for ease of resource gathering . buckley and ewenny became leading areas of pottery production in wales during the 17th and 18th centuries ; these are applied as generic terms to different potters within those areas during this period . south wales had several notable pottery during that same period , an early exponent being the cambrian pottery ( 1764–1870 , also known as '' swansea pottery '' ) . the works from cambrian attempted to imitate those of wedgwood . nantgarw pottery , near cardiff , was in operation from 1813 to 1823 making fine porcelain . llanelli was the last surviving major pottery works in south wales when it closed in 1922 . . literature . . theatre . theatrical performances are thought to have begun after the roman invasion of britain . there are remains of a roman amphitheatre at caerleon , which would have served the nearby fortress of isca augusta . between roman and modern times , theatre in wales was limited to performances of travelling players , sometimes in temporary structures . welsh theatrical groups also performed in england , as did english groups in wales . the rise of the puritans in the 17th century and then methodism during the 18th century caused declines in welsh theatre as performances were seen as immoral . despite this , performances continued on showgrounds , and with a handful of travelling groups of actors . the savoy theatre , monmouth , the oldest theatre still in operation in wales , was built during the 19th century and originally operated as the assembly rooms . other theatres opened over the following decades , with cardiff 's theatre royal opening in 1827 . after a fire , a replacement theatre royal opened in 1878 . competition for theatres led to further buildings being constructed , such as the new theatre , cardiff , which opened on 10 december 1906 . . television . television in the united kingdom started in 1936 as a public service which was free of advertising , but did not arrive in wales until the opening of the wenvoe transmitter in august 1952 . initially all programmes were in the english language , although under the leadership of welsh director and controller alun oldfield-davies , occasional welsh language programmes were broadcast during closed periods , replacing the test card . in 1958 , responsibility for programming in wales fell to television wales and the west , although welsh language broadcasting was mainly served by the manchester-based granada company , producing about an hour a week . on the 1 november 1982 , s4c ( sianel pedwar cymru ) was launched bringing together the bbc , htv and other independent producers to provide an initial service of 22 hours of welsh-language television . with the completion of the digital switchover in wales on 31 march 2010—which made english-language channel 4 available across wales—s4c 's bilingual analogue channel closed , and what had been s4c digidol became the default s4c channel , available on freeview and pay television , and broadcasting entirely in welsh . the decision by julie gardner , head of drama for bbc wales , to film and produce the 2005 revived version of doctor who in wales is widely seen as a bellwether moment for the industry for the nation . this in turn was followed by the opening of the roath lock production studios in cardiff . recent english language programmes that have been filmed in wales include sherlock and his dark materials , while other popular series , such as hinterland ( y gwyll ) and keeping faith ( un bore mercher ) have been filmed in both welsh and english . . film . the cinema of wales comprises the art of film and creative movies made in wales or by welsh filmmakers either locally or abroad . welsh cinema began in the late-19th century , led by welsh-based director william haggar . wales continued to produce film of varying quality throughout the 20th century , in both the welsh and english languages , though indigenous production was curtailed through a lack of infrastructure and finance , which prevented the growth of the industry nationally . despite this , wales has been represented in all fields of the film making process , producing actors and directors of note . music . left wales is often referred to as '' the land of song '' , and is notable for its harpists , male choirs , and solo artists . the principal welsh festival of music and poetry is the annual national eisteddfod . the llangollen international eisteddfod echoes the national eisteddfod but provides an opportunity for the singers and musicians of the world to perform . traditional music and dance in wales is supported by many societies . the welsh folk song society has published a number of collections of songs and tunes . male choirs ( sometimes called male voice choirs ) , which emerged in the 19th century , have remained a lasting tradition in wales . originally these choirs were formed as the tenor and bass sections of chapel choirs , and embraced the popular secular hymns of the day . many of the historic welsh choirs survive , singing a mixture of traditional and popular songs . traditional instruments of wales include telyn deires ( triple harp ) , fiddle , crwth , pibgorn ( hornpipe ) and other instruments . the cerdd dant society promotes its specific singing art primarily through an annual one-day festival . the bbc national orchestra of wales performs in wales and internationally . the welsh national opera is based at the wales millennium centre in cardiff bay , while the national youth orchestra of wales was the first of its type in the world . wales has had a number of successful singers . in the 1960s , these included bands such as amen corner and the iveys/badfinger and singers including sir tom jones , shirley bassey and mary hopkin . by the 1980s , indie pop and alternative rock bands such as the alarm , the pooh sticks and the darling buds were popular in their genres . but the wider view at the time was that the wider welsh music scene was stagnant , as the more popular musicians from wales were from earlier eras . in the 1990s , in england , the britpop scene was emerging , while in wales , bands such as y cyrff and ffa coffi pawb began to sing in english , starting a culture that would lead to the creation of catatonia and the super furry animals . the influence of the 80s bands and the emergence of a welsh language and dual language music scene locally in wales led to a dramatic shift in opinion across the united kingdom as the '' cool cymru '' bands of the period emerged . the leading welsh band during this period was the manic street preachers , whose 1996 album everything must go has been listed among the greatest albums of all time . some of those bands have had ongoing success , while the general popularity of welsh music during this period led to a resurgence of singers such as tom jones with his album reload . it was his first non-compilation number one album since 1968 's delilah . meanwhile , shirley bassey reached the top 20 once more in the uk charts with her collaboration with the propellerheads on the single '' history repeating '' . they also introduced new acts , such as catatonia 's owen powell working with duffy during her early period . moving into the 21st century , bullet for my valentine were named the best british band at the kerrang ! awards for three years running . other successful bands from this period include funeral for a friend , and lostprophets . . media . sport . thumb over fifty national governing bodies regulate and organise their sports in wales . most of those involved in competitive sports select , organise and manage individuals or teams to represent their country at international events or fixtures against other countries . wales is represented at major world sporting events such as the fifa world cup , the rugby world cup and the commonwealth games . at the olympic games , welsh athletes compete alongside those of scotland , england and northern ireland as part of a great britain team . rugby union is seen as a symbol of welsh identity and an expression of national consciousness . wales national rugby union team takes part in the annual six nations championship and has also competed in every rugby world cup , with wales hosting the 1999 tournament . the five professional sides that replaced the traditional club sides in major competitions in 2003 were in turn replaced in 2004 by the four regions : scarlets ; cardiff blues ; dragons ( rugby union ) ; and the ospreys . the welsh regional teams play in the pro14 league , the anglo-welsh cup ( lv cup ) , the heineken cup and the european challenge cup . wales has had its own league of wales since 1992 . for historical and other reasons , two welsh clubs ( cardiff city and swansea city ) play in the the football league . another three welsh clubs play in english football 's feeder leagues : wrexham , newport county and merthyr town . this also qualifies those teams to compete for england 's domestic trophies . on 23 april 1927 , cardiff city became the only team outside england to win the fa cup . in european football competitions , only teams playing in the welsh leagues are eligible to play for wales . the five teams in the english leagues are eligible to represent england only , and they are not allowed to compete for domestic welsh trophies . left in international cricket , wales and england field a single representative team , administered by the england and wales cricket board ( ecb ) , called the england cricket team , or simply '' england '' . occasionally , a separate wales national cricket team plays in limited-overs competitions , mainly against english county teams . glamorgan is the only welsh participant in the england and wales county championship . plaid cymru have argued that wales should have its own international team and withdraw from the existing arrangement under which welsh players play for england . the proposal has aroused opposition from cricket wales and glamorgan county cricket club , who argue such a move would be financially disastrous . the debate focused on a report produced by the welsh national assembly 's petitions committee , which reflected the arguments on both sides . bethan jenkins , plaid cymru 's spokesperson on heritage , culture , sport and broadcasting , and a member of the petitions committee , said : '' cricket wales and glamorgan ccc say the idea of a welsh national cricket team is ‘ an emotive subject ’ . of course having a national team is emotive . you only have to look at the stands during any national game to see that . to suggest this as anything other than natural is a bit of a misleading argument . '' in their strategic plan , cricket wales state they are '' committed to continuing to play a major role within the ecb '' wales has produced several world-class participants in individual sports , including snooker players ray reardon , terry griffiths , mark williams and matthew stevens . successful track athletes include miler jim alford who was a world record holder in the 4 x 1500 metres relay , the 110-metre hurdler colin jackson who is a former world record holder and the winner of numerous olympic , world and european medals , and tanni grey-thompson who has won 11 paralympic gold medals . wales has also produced a number of world-class boxers . joe calzaghe was wbo world super-middleweight champion and then won the wba , wbc and ring magazine super-middleweight and ring magazine light-heavyweight titles . other former boxing world champions include enzo maccarinelli , freddie welsh , howard winstone , percy jones , jimmy wilde , steve robinson and robbie regan . . cuisine . file : white welsh mountain sheep.jpg thumb right a white welsh mountain sheep wales is not considered to have a strong food identity ; some people consider that there is '' no such thing as welsh food '' . welsh cookery is said to be similar to english cuisine in style . however , there are regional variations in the food seen across wales , which can be traced historically to the availability of certain crops and produce in specific areas of the country . the cuisine of gower is particularly different to the rest of wales . it was strongly influenced by somerset and devon , and developed dishes such as whitepot while ingredients such as pumpkin were used , which are unusual in the rest of wales . cattle farming produces the majority of wales ' agricultural output . welsh beef is protected under european union law , meaning that it must be produced and slaughtered in wales . welsh pigs are raised , providing good cuts of meat . the mountainous areas of wales are suited to sheep farming and this has led to an association of their meat with the country . the mutton of wales has been popular in the rest of the united kingdom since the 16th century , and by the end of the 20th century there were more than 11 million sheep in wales . several welsh dishes are thought of as welsh because their ingredients are associated with wales , whereas others have been developed there . cawl is regarded as the welsh national dish ; it is a slow-cooked meat and vegetable broth . traditionally it was a vegetable-heavy dish , but now it is more likely to contain beef or lamb . welsh rarebit is thought to date from the 18th century , although the original term '' welsh rabbit '' may have been intended as a slur against the welsh . another use of cheese in a traditional welsh dish is seen in glamorgan sausage , which is a skinless sausage made of cheese and either leek or spring onion , which is then rolled into a sausage shape before frying . laverbread is made using a purée of seaweed , and is traditionally served in a welsh breakfast . welsh cakes are made on a bakestone , and are small round spiced cakes containing raisins , sultanas and occasionally currants . bara brith contains similar ingredients to welsh cakes , but is similar to a tea bread . the welsh have their own versions of pancakes : crempogau ( sing . crempog ) ( sometimes called ffroes , sing . ffroesen ) are traditionally layered on top of each other to form a large cake . some are very much like american pancakes ; others may be made with yeast ( called crempogau burum , sing . crempog furum ) or oatmeal ( although this is also true of american pancakes ) and some are like scotch pancakes . freeman , bobby ( 2006 ) first catch your peacock : her classic guide to welsh food , y lolfa ; new edition , pp . 195–196 tibbit , sara minwell ( 1991 ) baking in wales , national museums and galleries of wales , p . 13 beer is the beer in wales of wales , despite the influence of the temperance movement in wales . the wrexham lager was the first successful lager producer in britain when it opened in 1882 , and the felinfoel brewery was the first brewery in europe to put beer in cans . whisky production in wales was historically a niche industry , and completely shut down in 1910 when the last distillery was bought out by a scottish firm . however , the penderyn distillery produced the first wales-created whisky in a century to go on sale when it was launched in 2004 . there are 20 welsh vineyards producing 100,000 bottles of wine a year in total . . see also . architecture of wales cool cymru culture of gwynedd during the high middle ages cultural relationship between the welsh and the english welsh mythology list of welsh people . notes . references . . external links . traditions & history of wales via visitwales.com pt : país de gales cultura