Tourism in Italy

history . beginnings . people have visited italy for centuries , yet the first to visit the peninsula for touristic reasons were aristocrats during the grand tour , beginning in the late 17th century , and flourishing in the 18th century . rome , as the capital of the powerful and influential roman empire , attracted thousands to the city and country from all over the empire , which included most of the mediterranean , northern africa , mainland great britain ( england ) and the parts of the middle east . traders and merchants came to italy from several different parts of the world . when the empire fell in 476 ad , rome was no longer the epicentre of european politics and culture ; on the other hand , it was the base of the papacy , which then governed the growing christian religion , meaning that rome remained one of europe 's major places of pilgrimage . pilgrims , for centuries and still today , would come to the city , and that would have been the early equivalent of '' tourism '' or '' religious tourism '' . the trade empires of venice , pisa and genoa meant that several traders , businessmen and merchants from all over the world would also regularly come to italy . in the 16th and early 17th century , with the height of the renaissance , several students came to italy to study italian architecture , such as inigo jones . grand tour . real '' tourism '' only affected in italy in the second half of the 17th century , with the beginning of the grand tour . this was a period in which european aristocrats , many of whom were british , visited parts of europe ; italy , greece and other mediterranean places were amongst the most popular . this was in order to study ancient architecture and the local culture . the grand tour was in essence triggered by the book voyage to italy , by roman catholic priest richard lassels , and published in 1670 . due to the grand tour , tourism became even more prevalent - making italy one of the most desired destinations for millions of people . once inside what would be modern-day italy , these tourists would begin by visiting turin for a short while . on the way there , milan was also a popular stop , yet a trip to the city was not considered essential , and several passed by , or simply stayed for a short period of time . if a person came via boat , then they would remain a few days in genoa . yet , the main destination in northern italy was venice , which was considered a vital stop , as well as cities around it such as verona , vicenza and padua . as the tour went on , tuscan cities were also very important itinerary stops . florence was a major attraction , and other tuscan towns , such as siena , pisa , lucca and san gimignano , were also considered important destinations . the most prominent stop in central italy , however , was rome , a major centre for the arts and culture , as well as an essential city for a grand tourist . later , they would go down to the bay of naples , and after their discovery in 1710 , pompeii and herculaneum were popular too . sicily was considered a significant part of the trail , and several , such as goethe , visited the island . mass tourism . throughout the 17th to 18th centuries , the grand tour was mainly reserved for academics or the elite . nevertheless , circa 1840 , rail transport was introduced and the grand tour started to fall slightly out of vogue ; hence , the first form of mass-tourism was introduced . the 1840s saw the period in which the victorian middle classes toured the country . several americans were also able to visit italy , and many more tourists came to the peninsula . places such as venice , florence , rome , naples and sicily still remained the top attractions . like many other europeans , italians rely heavily on public transport . italy is a relatively small country and distances are reduced . as the century progressed , fewer cultural visits were made , and there was an increase of tourists coming for italy 's nature and weather . the first seaside resorts , such as those in the ligurian coast , around venice , coastal tuscany and amalfi , became popular . this vogue of summer holidays heightened in the fin-de-siècle epoch , when numerous '' grand hotels '' were built ( including places such as sanremo , lido di venezia , viareggio and forte dei marmi ) . islands such as capri , ischia , procida and elba grew in popularity , and the northern lakes , such as lake como , maggiore and garda were more frequently visited . tourism to italy remained very popular until the late-1920s and early-1930s , when , with the great depression and economic crisis , several could no longer afford to visit the country ; the increasing political instability meant that fewer tourists came . only old touristic groups , such as the scorpioni , remained alive . after a big slump in tourism beginning from approximately 1929 and lasting after world war ii , italy returned to its status as a popular resort , with the italian economic miracle and raised living standards ; films such as la dolce vita were successful abroad , and their depiction of the country 's perceivedly idyllic life helped raise italy 's international profile . by this point , with higher incomes , italians could also afford to go on holiday ; coastline resorts saw a soar in visitors , especially in romagna . many cheap hotels and pensioni ( hostels ) were built in the 1960s , and with the rise of wealth , by now , even a working-class italian family could afford a holiday somewhere along the coast . the late-1960s also brought mass-popularity to mountain holidays and skiing ; in piedmont and the aosta valley , numerous ski resorts and chalets started being built . the 1970s also brought a wave of foreign tourists to italy in search of a sentimental trip villoresi old charm -the trip to italy , since mediterranean destinations saw a rise in global visitors . despite this , by the late-1970s and early-1980s , economic crises and political instability meant that there was a significant slump in the italian tourist industry , as destinations in the far east or south america rose in popularity . yet , by the late-1980s and early-1990s , tourism saw a return to popularity , with cities such as milan becoming more popular destinations . milan saw a rise in tourists , since it was ripening its position as a worldwide fashion capital . statistics . the table below shows the distribution of national and international visitor nights spent in the 40 most tourist area of italy in 2017 . italy overall had 420.63 million visitor nights in 2017 , of which 210.66 million were of foreign guests ( 50.08 percent ) . with 37.04 million nights spent in hotels , hostels or clinics , the metropolitan city of venice has the most visitors . . regions . northwest italy . regions : piedmont , liguria , lombardia and valle d'aosta home of the italian riviera , including portofino , sanremo , and of cinque terre . there are many historic cities in this part of italy : turin , the manufacturing capital of italy , milan , the business and fashion capital of the country and the important port of genoa are the most popular tourist destinations of the area . other cities like aosta , bergamo , brescia and como have a rich cultural heritage , which share the region 's visitors with beautiful landscapes such as the lakes garda , como and maggiore . there are also important ski resorts like sestriere , courmayeur , breuil-cervinia , livigno and bormio . northeast italy . regions : emilia-romagna , friuli-venezia giulia , trentino-alto adige/südtirol and veneto this part of italy also boasts several important tourist attractions , such as the canal-filled city of venice , the cities of verona , vicenza , padua , trento , bolzano , cremona , bologna , ferrara , mantua , parma , ravenna , cesena , rimini and trieste . there are also several mountain ranges such as the dolomites , the carnic and julian alps and first-class ski resorts like cortina d'ampezzo and madonna di campiglio . these four regions offer much to see and do . the area has a unique cuisine , including wines and dishes such as prosecco and tiramisu in veneto and cotechino , ragù and parma ham in emilia romagna , san daniele ham and d.o.c . wines in valpolicella , lake garda , valdobbiadene , trentino and friuli-venezia giulia . central italy . regions : lazio , marche , tuscany and umbria this area is possibly the most visited in italy and contains many popular attractions as well as sought-after landscapes . rome boasts the remaining wonders of the roman empire and some of the world 's best known landmarks such as the colosseum . florence , regarded as the birthplace of the italian renaissance , is tuscany 's most visited city , whereas nearby cities like siena , pisa , arezzo and lucca also have rich cultural heritages . umbria 's population is small but it has many important cities such as perugia and assisi . for similar reasons , lazio and tuscany are some of italy 's most visited regions and the main targets for ecotourism . this area is known for its picturesque landscapes and attracts tourists from all over the world , including italy itself . pristine landscapes serve as one of the primary motivators for tourists to visit central italy , although there are others , such as a rich history of art . southern italy . regions : apulia , basilicata , calabria , campania , abruzzo , and molise . southern italy ( also called mezzogiorno ) is well known for the cuisine , that offers a wide choice of food at lower prices . it is also known for the pairing of mediterranean clime with the beautiful beaches of each region , an important element for local tourism . naples is the most visited city in the area , and the ruins of pompeii are the most visited sights . other important tourist destinations include the amalfi coast , ravello , benevento , caserta , salerno and pozzuoli . the natural parks of abruzzo , the greenest region in europe , include the abruzzo national park , the gran sasso e monti della laga national park the maiella national park and sirente-velino regional park which attract thousands of visitors due to more than 30 protected nature reserves and the presence of 75 % of all europe 's living species . apulia , which includes the historical cities of lecce and bari and villages composed of trullo ; like calabria it is famous for its coasts . basilicata is very famous for so-called sassi di matera . the main city of molise are campobasso and isernia , the most important sight is the basilica of castelpetroso . calabria coasts are very appreciated by tourists ; the capital city is catanzaro but its most populated city is reggio calabria . sicily . the largest island in the country is a diverse and popular tourist island , famous for its archaeology , seascape and unique sicilian cuisine . there are many important cities such as palermo , messina , catania . an important sight is val di noto that offers a lot of late baroque cities built after the catastrophic earthquake of 1693 . sardinia . sardinia is a large island some 250 kilometers west of the italian coastline . it includes several popular tourist attractions and has several beaches and archaeological ruins . it is also known for its beaches , that are among the most beautiful in the world , and include the famous pink beaches in the archipelago of la maddalena . the most popular cities in sardinia are : cagliari , sassari , alghero , olbia and porto cervo . porto cervo , located in costa smeralda , is a popular summer destination famous for its beaches and clubs among high-income earners . ancient resorts . italy has some of the world 's most ancient tourist resorts , dating back to the time of the roman republic , when destinations such as pompeii , naples , ischia , capri and especially baiae were popular with the rich of roman society . pompeii is currently italy 's third the world 's 48th most visited tourist destination , with over 2.5 million tourists a year . cities . rome . rome has become increasingly popular as a tourist destination globally . 45.6 % from 2006 ( 6.03 million ) , rome hosted 8.78 million international tourists in 2014 , placing itself as the 14th most visited city in the world . popular tourists attractions in the city include the colosseum , st peter 's basilica , the pantheon and so on , all of which are part of the world heritage property . other main sights in the city include , the trevi fountain , piazza navona , roman forum , castel sant'angelo , the basilica of st . john lateran , the spanish steps , villa borghese park , piazza del popolo , the trastevere and the janiculum . . milan . milan is one of europe 's most important tourist destinations , and italy 's second ; with 6.05 million international arrivals as measured in 2014 , it placed itself as the 24th most visited city in the world . according to a particular source , 56 % of international visitors to milan are from europe , whilst 44 % of the city 's tourists are italian , and 56 % are from abroad . the most important european union markets are the united kingdom ( 16 % ) , germany ( 9 % ) and france ( 6 % ) . according to the same study , most of the visitors who come from the usa to the city go on business matters , whilst china and japanese tourists mainly take up the leisure segment . the city boasts several popular tourist attractions , such as the city 's duomo and piazza , the la scala , the san siro , the vittorio emanuele ii gallery , the sforza castle , the pinacoteca di brera and the via monte napoleone . most tourists visit sights such as milan cathedral , the sforza castle and the la scala , however , other main sights such as the basilica of sant'ambrogio , the navigli and the brera academy are less visited and prove to be less popular . the city also has numerous hotels , including the ultra-luxurious town house galleria , which is the world 's first seven-star hotel , ranked officially by the société générale de surveillance , and one of the leading hotels of the world . the average stay for a tourist in the city is of 3.43 nights , whilst foreigners stay for longer periods of time , 77 % of which stay for a 2-5 night average . of the 75 % of visitors which stay in hotels , 4-star ones are the most popular ( 47 % ) , whilst 5-stars , or less than 3-stars represent 11 % and 15 % of the charts respectively . naples . naples is one of the oldest cities of the western world . its historic city centre is the largest in europe and is listed as a unesco world heritage site . naples is also near the famous volcano vesuvius and the ruins of the ancient roman towns of pompeii and ercolano . before italian unification it was the capital of kingdom of the two sicilies and the most important and populated city of italy . naples is well known for cuisine , especially for pizza . in the city there are many tourist attractions , such as the royal palace , the basilica of santa chiara , the gesù nuovo church , castel dell'ovo , the castel nuovo , the castel sant'elmo , the city 's duomo , the teatro di san carlo ( the oldest continuously active opera house in the world ) , the palace of capodimonte , the naples underground geothermal zone , the via tribunali , spaccanapoli street , the veiled christ ( one of the world 's most remarkable sculptures ) , the various catacombs around the city ( for example the catacombs of san gennaro , or the fontanelle cemetery , or the catacombs of saint gaudiosus ) , the umberto i gallery and the via toledo with its metro considered one of the most beautiful of europe . the archaeological museum of naples is the most important in the world regarding roman history , also include egyptian and greek finds . it is the home of the federico ii , the oldest public and secular university in the world , and of the l'orientale , the oldest school of sinology and oriental studies in europe . naples also boasts one of the most picturesque waterfront promenades , and charming locations at gaiola island and marechiaro . close to naples there are a myriad of world-renowned tourist attractions such as the amalfi coast , capri island , ischia island , procida island , the picturesque city of sorrento , and the city of salerno . other cities . florence ( firenze ) & mdash ; the city of renaissance . this city is known for its architecture and art and for the impact it has had throughout the world . florence is also home to michelangelo 's famous statue of david . home to many other well-known museums of art . palermo & mdash ; ancient capital of the kingdom of sicily and of the holy roman empire under frederick ii . it is noted for its history , gastronomy and architecture ; the particularity of the city ( such as the rest of the island ) is that is a meeting point of greek , roman , arabian , norman and aragonian cultures . bologna & mdash ; home of the first university in the western world . this city has a rich history , culture , and technology . bologna is well known for its cuisine . bari & mdash ; is well known as a port and university city as well as the city of saint nicholas . capital of apulia and second most important economic centre of southern italy after naples . genoa ( genova ) & mdash ; it was one of the most important medieval maritime republic . very wealthy and diverse city . its port brings in tourism and trade , along with art and architecture . genoa is birthplace of columbus and jeans . pisa & mdash ; one of the medieval maritime republics , it has many medieval palaces and squares . home to the unmistakable image of the leaning tower of pisa . very touristy city . famous too for the university '' la normale '' . turin ( torino ) & mdash ; first capital of italy , after being the capital of kingdom of sardinia ( actually piedmont-centred ) , what had promoted national reunification . home of the fiat , the most important industry in italy , turin is a well-known industrial city , based on the aerospace industry and , of course , automobile industry . home of the 2006 winter olympics . home of both juventus and torino football clubs . venice ( venezia ) & mdash ; known for its history ( the most important , beside genoa , amalfi and pisa , of the medieval maritime republics ) , art , and world-famous canals . it is home to island of murano , which is famous for its hand-blown glass . st . mark 's square is where most of the tourists converge and it can get very crowded in the summertime . due to increased tourism , in november 2016 , venetian authorities expressed their consideration on imposing a tourist limit on the city in order to prevent overcrowding and the degradation of the city 's heritage sites . . other popular destinations . apart from rome , milan , naples , venice , and florence are the top destinations for tourism in italy . other major tourist locations include turin , verona , bari , padua , bologna , messina , perugia , palermo , genoa , sicily , sardinia , and salento . two factors in each of these locations are history and geography . the roman empire , middle ages , and renaissance have left many cultural artifacts for the italian tourist industry to use . many northern cities are also able to use the alps as an attraction for winter sports , while coastal southern cities have the mediterranean sea to draw tourists looking for sun . italy is home to fifty unesco world heritage sites , more than any other country , including many entire cities such as verona , siena , vicenza , ferrara , san gimignano , urbino , matera , pompei , noto and siracusa . ravenna hosts an unprecedented eight different internationally recognized sites . hotel categories in italy . in italy there is a broad variety of hotels , going from 1-5 stars . in 2005 , there were 33,557 hotels with 1,020,000 rooms and 2,028,000 beds . : it : turismo in italia the number of hotels , according to their rating , in 2005 , went like this : 7-star hotels : 1 with 25 rooms ( the town house galleria located in milan ) . 5-star hotels : 232 with 20,686 rooms and 43,150 beds . 4-star hotels : nearly 3,700 with 247,000 rooms and 502,000 beds . 3-star hotels : 14,500 with 483,000 rooms and 940,000 beds . 2-star hotels : 5,000 with 116,000 beds . 1-star hotels : 2,000 with 157,000 beds . gallery . file : panorama of trevi fountain 2015.jpg the trevi fountain in rome . file:0482 - palermo - cattedrale - foto giovanni dall'orto 28-sept-2006.jpg cathedral of palermo , sicily file : speikboden gebiet.jpg the italian alps file : basilica di san pietro in vaticano september 2015-1a.jpg saint peter 's basilica , rome file : riva del garda.jpg lake garda file : reggia di caserta.png royal palace of caserta file : alimini otranto.jpg sea in otranto , apulia