Galaxy rotation curve

history . in 1932 , jan oort became the first to report that measurements of the stars in the solar neighborhood indicated that they moved faster than expected when a mass distribution based upon visible matter was assumed , but these measurements were later determined to be essentially erroneous . in 1939 , horace babcock reported in his phd thesis measurements of the rotation curve for andromeda which suggested that the mass-to-luminosity ratio increases radially . he attributed that to either the absorption of light within the galaxy or to modified dynamics in the outer portions of the spiral and not to any form of missing matter . babcock 's measurements turned out to disagree substantially with those found later , and the first measurement of an extended rotation curve in good agreement with modern data was published in 1957 by henk van de hulst and collaborators , who studied m31 with the newly commissioned dwingeloo 25 meter telescope . a companion paper by maarten schmidt showed that this rotation curve could be fit by a flattened mass distribution more extensive than the light . in 1959 , louise volders used the same telescope to demonstrate that the spiral galaxy m33 also does not spin as expected according to keplerian dynamics . reporting on ngc 3115 , jan oort wrote that '' the distribution of mass in the system appears to bear almost no relation to that of light . one finds the ratio of mass to light in the outer parts of ngc 3115 to be about 250 '' . oort , j.h . ( 1940 ) , some problems concerning the structure and dynamics of the galactic system and the elliptical nebulae ngc 3115 and 4494 on page 302-303 of his journal article , he wrote that '' the strongly condensed luminous system appears imbedded in a large and more or less homogeneous mass of great density '' and although he went on to speculate that this mass may be either extremely faint dwarf stars or interstellar gas and dust , he had clearly detected the dark matter halo of this galaxy . the carnegie telescope ( carnegie double astrograph ) was intended to study this problem of galactic rotation . in the late 1960s and early 1970s , vera rubin , an astronomer at the department of terrestrial magnetism at the carnegie institution of washington , worked with a new sensitive spectrograph that could measure the velocity curve of edge-on spiral galaxies to a greater degree of accuracy than had ever before been achieved . together with fellow staff-member kent ford , rubin announced at a 1975 meeting of the american astronomical society the discovery that most stars in spiral galaxies orbit at roughly the same speed , and that this implied that galaxy masses grow approximately linearly with radius well beyond the location of most of the stars ( the galactic bulge ) . rubin presented her results in an influential paper in 1980 . these results suggested that either gravity does not apply universally or that , conservatively , upwards of 50 % of the mass of galaxies was contained in the relatively dark galactic halo . although initially met with skepticism , rubin 's results have been confirmed over the subsequent decades . if newtonian mechanics is assumed to be correct , it would follow that most of the mass of the galaxy had to be in the galactic bulge near the center and that the stars and gas in the disk portion should orbit the center at decreasing velocities with radial distance from the galactic center ( the dashed line in fig . 1 ) . observations of the rotation curve of spirals , however , do not bear this out . rather , the curves do not decrease in the expected inverse square root relationship but are '' flat '' , i.e . outside of the central bulge the speed is nearly a constant ( the solid line in fig . 1 ) . it is also observed that galaxies with a uniform distribution of luminous matter have a rotation curve that rises from the center to the edge , and most low-surface-brightness galaxy ( lsb galaxies ) have the same anomalous rotation curve . the rotation curves might be explained by hypothesizing the existence of a substantial amount of matter permeating the galaxy outside of the central bulge that is not emitting light in the mass-to-light ratio of the central bulge . the material responsible for the extra mass was dubbed dark matter , the existence of which was first posited in the 1930s by jan oort in his measurements of the oort constants and fritz zwicky in his studies of the masses of galaxy clusters . the existence of cold dark matter ( cdm ) is today a major feature of the lambda-cdm model that describes the cosmology of the universe . halo density profiles . in order to accommodate a flat rotation curve , a density profile for a galaxy and its environs must be different than one that is centrally concentrated . newton 's version of kepler 's third law implies that the spherically symmetric , radial density profile is : : \rho ( r ) \frac with the galaxy gravitational potential . since observations of galaxy rotation do not match the distribution expected from application of kepler 's laws , they do not match the distribution of luminous matter . this implies that spiral galaxies contain large amounts of dark matter or , in alternative , the existence of exotic physics in action on galactic scales . the additional invisible component becomes progressively more conspicuous in each galaxy at outer radii and among galaxies in the less luminous ones . a popular interpretation of these observations is that about 26 % of the mass of the universe is composed of dark matter , a hypothesis type of matter which does not emit or interact with electromagnetic radiation . dark matter is believed to dominate the gravitational potential of galaxies and clusters of galaxies . under this theory , galaxies are baryonic condensations of stars and gas ( namely h and he ) that lie at the centers of much larger haloes of dark matter , affected by a gravitational instability caused by primordial density fluctuations . many cosmologists strive to understand the nature and the history of these ubiquitous dark haloes by investigating the properties of the galaxies they contain ( i.e . their luminosities , kinematics , sizes , and morphologies ) . the measurement of the kinematics ( their positions , velocities and accelerations ) of the observable stars and gas has become a tool to investigate the nature of dark matter , as to its content and distribution relative to that of the various baryonic components of those galaxies . further investigations . the rotational dynamics of galaxies are well characterized by their position on the tully–fisher relation , which shows that for spiral galaxies the rotational velocity is uniquely related to its total luminosity . a consistent way to predict the rotational velocity of a spiral galaxy is to measure its bolometric luminosity and then read its rotation rate from its location on the tully–fisher diagram . conversely , knowing the rotational velocity of a spiral galaxy gives its luminosity . thus the magnitude of the galaxy rotation is related to the galaxy 's visible mass . while precise fitting of the bulge , disk , and halo density profiles is a rather complicated process , it is straightforward to model the observables of rotating galaxies through this relationship . so , while state-of-the-art cosmological and galaxy formation simulations of dark matter with normal baryonic matter included can be matched to galaxy observations , there is not yet any straightforward explanation as to why the observed scaling relationship exists . additionally , detailed investigations of the rotation curves of low-surface-brightness galaxy ( lsb galaxies ) in the 1990s and of their position on the tully–fisher relation showed that lsb galaxies had to have dark matter haloes that are more extended and less dense than those of hsb galaxies and thus surface brightness is related to the halo properties . such dark-matter-dominated dwarf galaxy may hold the key to solving the dwarf galaxy problem of structure formation . very importantly , the analysis of the inner parts of low and high surface brightness galaxies showed that the shape of the rotation curves in the centre of dark-matter dominated systems indicates a profile different from the nfw spatial mass distribution profile . this so-called cuspy halo problem is a persistent problem for the standard cold dark matter theory . simulations involving the feedback of stellar energy into the interstellar medium in order to alter the predicted dark matter distribution in the innermost regions of galaxies are frequently invoked in this context . . alternatives to dark matter . there have been a number of attempts to solve the problem of galaxy rotation by modifying gravity without invoking dark matter . one of the most discussed is modified newtonian dynamics ( mond ) , originally proposed by mordehai milgrom in 1983 , which modifies the newtonian force law at low accelerations to enhance the effective gravitational attraction . mond has had a considerable amount of success in predicting the rotation curves of low-surface-brightness galaxies , matching the baryonic tully–fisher relation , and the velocity dispersions of the small satellite galaxies of the local group . using data from the spitzer photometry and accurate rotation curves ( sparc ) database , a group has found the radial acceleration traced by rotation curves could be predicted just from the observed baryon distribution ( that is , including stars and gas but not dark matter ) . the same relation provided a good fit for 2693 samples in 153 rotating galaxies , with diverse shapes , masses , sizes , and gas fractions . brightness in the near ir , where the more stable light from red giants dominates , was used to estimate the density contribution due to stars more consistently . the results are consistent with mond , and place limits on alternative explanations involving dark matter alone . however , cosmological simulations within a lambda-cdm framework that include baryonic feedback effects reproduce the same relation , without the need to invoke new dynamics ( such as mond ) . thus , a contribution due to dark matter itself can be fully predictable from that of the baryons , once the feedback effects due to the dissipative collapse of baryons is taken into account . mond is not a relativistic theory , although relativistic theories which reduce to mond have been proposed , such as tensor–vector–scalar gravity ( teves ) , scalar–tensor–vector gravity ( stvg ) , and the f ( r ) theory of capozziello and de laurentis . . a model of galaxy based on a general relativity metric was also proposed , showing that the rotation curves for the milky way , ngc 3031 , ngc 3198 and ngc 7331 are consistent with the mass density distributions of the visible matter , avoiding the need for a massive halo of exotic dark matter . cooperstock , fred i . , and s . tieu . '' general relativity resolves galactic rotation without exotic dark matter . '' arxiv preprint astro-ph/0507619 ( 2005 ) . according to a 2020 analysis of the data produced by the gaia spacecraft , it would seem possible to explain at least the milky way 's rotation curve without requiring any dark matter if instead of a newtonian approximation the entire set of equations of general relativity is adopted . . see also . long-slit spectroscopy nonsymmetric gravitational theory unsolved problems in physics . footnotes . further reading . primary research report discussing oort limit , and citing original oort 1932 study . bibliography . this was the first detailed study of orbital rotation in galaxies . observations of a set of spiral galaxies gave evidence that orbital velocities of stars in galaxies were unexpectedly high at large distances from the nucleus . this paper was influential in convincing astronomers that most of the matter in the universe is dark , and much of it is clumped about galaxies . galactic astronomy , dmitri mihalas and paul mcrae.w . h . freeman 1968 . external links . the case against dark matter . about erik verlinde 's approach to the problem . ( november 2016 )