Forth and Clyde Canal

geography . the eastern end of the canal is connected to the river forth by a stretch of the river carron near grangemouth . the canal roughly follows the course of the roman antonine wall and was the biggest infrastructure project in scotland since then . the highest section of the canal passes close to kilsyth and it is fed there by an aqueduct which gathers water from ( the purpose built ) birkenburn reservoir in the kilsyth hills , stored in another purpose-built reservoir called townhead near banton , from where it feeds the canal via a feeder from the shawend burn near craigmarloch . the canal continues past twechar , through kirkintilloch and bishopbriggs to the maryhill area north of glasgow city centre . a branch to port dundas was built to secure the agreement and financial support of glasgow merchants who feared losing business if the canal bypassed them completely . this branch flows past murano street student village , halls of residence for the university of glasgow . the western end of the canal connects to the river clyde at bowling . in 1840 , a canal , the forth and cart canal , was built to link the forth and clyde canal , at whitecrook , to the river clyde , opposite the mouth of the river cart . origins . priestley , writing in 1831 , said : the first act of parliament relating to this canal , received the royal assent on the 8th of march , 1768 , and it is entitled , 'an act for making and maintaining a navigable canal from the firth of forth , at or near the mouth of the river carron , in the stirlingshire , to the firth of clyde , at or near a place called dalmuir burnfoot , in the dumbartonshire ; and also a collateral cut from the same to the city of glasgow ; and for making a navigable cut or canal of communication from the port or harbour of bo'ness , to join the said canal at or near the place where it will fall into the firth of forth . ' the subscribers were incorporated by the name of '' the company of proprietors of the forth and clyde navigation , '' with power to raise among themselves the sum of £150,000 , in fifteen hundred shares of £100 each , and an additional sum of £50,000 , if necessary . joseph priestley , a historical account of the navigable rivers , canals , and railways , of great britain , longman , rees orme , brown and green , london , 1831 at first there were difficulties with securing the capital for the work , but soon , thanks in the main to investment by sir lawrence dundas , 1st baronet , '' the execution of this canal proceeded with such rapidity , under the direction of the engineer mr . smeaton , that in two years and three quarters from the date of the first act , one half of the work was finished ; when , in consequence of some misunderstanding between him and the proprietors , he declined any further connection with the work , which was shortly afterwards let to contractors , who however failed , and the canal was again placed under the direction of its original projector , who brought it to within of its proposed junction with the clyde , when the work was stopped in 1775 for want of funds , and it continued at a stand for several years . '' numerous supplementary acts of parliament preceded this period and more followed , but the key to unlocking the problem was some creativity , in which '' the barons of the court of exchequer in scotland , are , out of the money arising from the sale of forfeited estates , directed to lend the forth and clyde navigation company the sum of £50,000 , by which they were enabled to resume their labours , under the direction of mr . robert whitworth , an engineer possessing a well earned reputation '' . the work was completed on 28 july 1790 . . contemporary description . priestley wrote in 1831 , besides the fine rivers above-mentioned the forth and clyde , the canal , is joined by the union canal ( scotland ) , near falkirk ; with the monkland and kirkintilloch railway at its summit , near the last-mentioned village ; and with the monkland canal and the garnkirk and glasgow railway , at port dundas , near the city of glasgow . this magnificent canal commences in the river forth , in grangemouth harbour , and near to where the carron empties itself into that river . its course is parallel with the carron , and in nearly a westwardly direction , passing to the north of the town of falkirk , and thence to red bridge , where it quits the county of stirling , and enters a detached portion of the shire of dumbarton . hence it passes to the south of kilsyth , and runs along the south bank of the river kelvin , and over the luggie water , by a fine stone aqueduct , at kirkintilloch ; it then approaches within little more than of the north-west quarter of the city of glasgow , to which there is a branch communicating with the monkland canal at port dundas , near that city . the remaining part of the line is in a westwardly direction , crossing the kelvin river by a noble aqueduct , and thence to the clyde , into which , after running parallel with it for some distance , it locks down at bowling 's bay , near dalmuir burnfoot . the canal is in length , viz , from grangemouth to the east end of the summit pool , is ten miles and three quarters , with a rise , from low water in the forth , of , by twenty locks . the summit level is in length , and in the remainder of its course , there is a fall to low water , in the clyde , at bowling 's bay , of , by nineteen locks . the branch to the monkland canal at glasgow is two miles and three quarters ; and there is another cut into the carron river , at carron shore , in order to communicate with the carron iron works . though this canal was originally constructed for vessels drawing , yet by recent improvements , sea-borne craft of draught may now pass through it , from the irish sea to the north sea . the locks are 74 feet long and 20 wide ; and upon its course are thirty-three draw-bridges , ten large aqueducts and thirty-three smaller ones ; that over the kelvin being long and above the surface of the stream . it is supplied with water from reservoirs ; one of which , at kilmananmuir , is , and deep at the sluice ; and that at kilsyth is in extent , with water at its head . . passenger traffic . between 1789 and 1803 the canal was used for trials of william symington 's steamboats , culminating in the charlotte dundas , the '' first practical steamboat '' built at the shipyard in grangemouth by alexander hart . passenger boats ran on the canal from 1783 , and in 1809 fast boats were introduced , running from edinburgh to falkirk in 3 hours 30 minutes , providing such comforts as food , drink and newspapers . by 1812 they carried 44,000 passengers , taking receipts of more than £3,450 . from 1828 there was a steamboat service , operated by thomas grahame 's boat cupid . . construction . the canal was designed by john smeaton . construction started in 1768 and after delays due to funding problems was completed in 1790 . the geologist james hutton became very involved in the canal between 1767 and 1774 ; he contributed his geological knowledge , made extended site inspections , and acted both as a shareholder and as a member of the management committee . the union canal was then constructed to link the eastern end of the canal to edinburgh . changes of ownership . in 1842 an act of parliament was obtained authorising the caledonian railway to take over the forth and clyde canal along with the forth and cart canal , although this did not take effect until 1867 . in the meantime the canal company itself had built a railway branch line to grangemouth dock , which it owned . the canal was nationalised in 1948 , along with the railway companies , and control passed to the british transport commission . in 1962 , the british transport commission was wound up , and control passed to the british waterways board ; subsequently scottish canals took control . run down and revival . in 1963 the canal was closed rather than construct a motorway crossing , and so it became disused and semi-derelict . canal locks in the falkirk area on the union canal near the connection to the forth and clyde canal had been filled in and built over in the 1930s . as part of the millennium celebrations in 2000 , national lottery funds were used to regenerate both canals . a boatlifting device , the falkirk wheel , was built to connect the two canals and once more allow boats to travel from the clyde or glasgow to edinburgh , with a new canal connection to the river carron and hence the river forth . the falkirk wheel opened on 27 may 2002 and is now a tourist attraction . the port dundas branch has been reconnected from stockingfield junction to pinkston basin , which once formed the terminus of the monkland canal , by the construction of of new canal and two locks . the project cost £5.6 & nbsp ; million , work starts on £5.6 million canal link , british waterways newsroom and the first lock and intermediate basin were opened on 29 september 2006 . opening of the second lock was delayed by a dispute over land ownership . waterways world , november 2006 , p.52 . forth and clyde canal society . the forth and clyde canal society is a waterway society on the forth and clyde canal in the central lowlands of scotland . it was formed in 1980 to '' campaign for the forth and clyde 's preservation , restoration and development '' according to the forth and clyde canal society 's website , their current aim is '' to promote the canal and to ensure its success '' . the society 's campaigning included a petition of over 30,000 signatures for the reopening of the canal , which was then put in place under the millennium link project which commenced work in 1999 . the society currently has four boats which are used as trip-boats , charter vessels and for members cruises along the canal . . locks . there are 39 locks on the forth & clyde canal , as follows : 1 – new river carron sea lock ( the helix canal extension – beyond the kelpies ) 2 – basin moorings ( sea lock ) 3 – carron cut lock 4 – abbotshaugh lock 5 – bainsford lock 6 – grahamston iron works lock 7 – merchiston lock 8 – merers lock 9 – camelon railway lock 10 – camelon lock 11 – rosebank lock 12 – camelon lock no . 12 13 – camelon lock no . 13 14 – camelon lock no . 14 15 – falkirk wheel 16 – falkirk bottom lock no . 16 17 – underwood lock no . 17 18 – allandale lock no . 18 19 – castlecary lock no . 19 20 – wyndford lock no . 20 ( summit level ) 21 – maryhill top lock no . 21 ( summit level ) 22 – maryhill lock 23 – maryhill lock 24 – maryhill lock 25 – maryhill bottom lock no . 25 26 – kelvindale ( temple lock no . 26 ) 27 – temple lock no . 27 28 – cloberhill top lock no . 28 29 – cloberhill middle lock no . 29 30 – cloberhill bottom lock no . 30 31 – cloberhill lock no . 31 32 – cloberhill lock no . 32 33 – boghouse top lock no . 33 34 – boghouse middle lock no . 34 35 – boghouse lower lock . 35 36 – no . 36 drop lock – dalmuir drop lock ( constructed recently to take navigation below bridge ) 37 – old kilpatrick 38 – dalnottar lock no . 37 39 – bowling lock no . 38 the overall ruling dimensions are length : ; beam : ; draught : ; headroom : , but at the western end larger vessels may use the bowling basin . data sourced from www.scottishcanals.co.uk . see also . auchinstarry and its new basin , a £1.2m regeneration project forth to firth canal pathway forth and cart canal falkirk helix john muir way world canals conference donald 's quay canal safety gates stockingfield junction . footnotes . further reading . lindsay , jean . the canals of scotland . newton abbot : david & charles , 1968 . brown , hamish . exploring the edinburgh to glasgow canals . london : stationery office , 1997 . macneill , john . canal navigation : on the resistance of water to the passage of boats upon canals and other bodies of water , being the results of experiments . london : roake and varty , 1833 . —see : appendix a . mouton , h.g . '' the forth and clyde ship canal , '' journal of political economy , vol . 18 , no . 9 ( nov . 1910 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 736–741 . in jstor . external links . glasgow 's canals unlocked , tourism publication by scottish canals environmental advisory service case study on auchinstarry basin the forth & clyde and union canals the scotland guide : glasgow , the forth and clyde canal – surveying the canal falkirk wheel the falkirk wheel – the forth and clyde canal history of the forth and clyde canal – clyde waterfront heritage national library of scotland : scottish screen archive ( archive films about the forth and clyde canal ) video footage of the stockingfield junction wwii 'stop or safety gate ' . video footage of stockingfield junction . video footage of ferrydyke quay and bascule bridge video footage of auchintarry marina video footage of the dalmuir drop lock