Webster's Dictionary

noah webster 's american dictionary of the english language . noah webster ( 1758–1843 ) , the author of the readers and spelling books which dominated the american market at the time , spent decades of research in compiling his dictionaries . his first dictionary , a compendious dictionary of the english language , appeared in 1806 . in it , he popularized features which would become a hallmark of american english spelling ( center rather than centre , honor rather than honour , program rather than programme , etc . ) and included technical terms from the arts and sciences rather than confining his dictionary to literary words . webster was a proponent of english spelling reform for reasons both philology and nationalistic . in a companion to the american revolution ( 2008 ) , john algeo notes : '' it is often assumed that characteristically american spellings were invented by noah webster . he was very influential in popularizing certain spellings in america , but he did not originate them . rather . he chose already existing options such as center , color and check on such grounds as simplicity , analogy or etymology '' . algeo , john . '' the effects of the revolution on language '' , in a companion to the american revolution . john wiley & sons , 2008 . p.599 in william shakespeare 's first folios , for example , spellings such as center and color are the most common . -or . online etymology dictionary . venezky , richard . the american way of spelling : the structure and origins of american english orthography . guilford press , 1999 . p.26 he spent the next two decades working to expand his dictionary . first edition 1828 . in 1828 , when noah webster was 70 , his american dictionary of the english language was published by s . converse in two quarto volumes containing 70,000 entries , as against the 58,000 of any previous dictionary . there were 2,500 copies printed , at 20 ( adjusted for inflation : 539.77 ) for the two volumes . at first the set sold poorly . when he lowered the price to 15 ( adjusted for inflation : 404.82 ) , its sales improved , and by 1836 that edition was exhausted . skeel , emily . a bibliography of the writings of noah webster ( 1958 ) , p . 234 . not all copies were bound at the same time ; the book also appeared in publisher 's boards ; other original bindings of a later date are not unknown . . second edition 1841 . . 1841 printing . in 1841 , 82-year-old noah webster published a second edition of his lexicographical masterpiece with the help of his son , william g . webster . its title page does not claim the status of second edition , merely noting that this new edition was the '' first edition in octavo '' in contrast to the quarto format of the first edition of 1828 . again in two volumes , the title page proclaimed that the dictionary contained '' the whole vocabulary of the quarto , with corrections , improvements and several thousand additional words : to which is prefixed an introductory dissertation on the origin , history and connection of the languages of western asia and europe , with an explanation of the principles on which languages are formed . noah webster , an american dictionary of the english language , second edition ( new haven , connecticut : the author , 1841 ) . b . l . hamlen of new haven , connecticut , prepared the 1841 printing of the second edition . morton , h . c . the story of webster 's third : philip gove 's controversial dictionary and its critics . cambridge university press , 1995 , . 1844 printing . when webster died , his heirs sold unbound sheets of his 1841 revision american dictionary of the english language to the firm of j . s . & c . adams of amherst , massachusetts . this firm bound and published a small number of copies in 1844 – the same edition that emily dickinson used as a tool for her poetic composition . noah webster , an american dictionary of the english language , second edition ( amherst , massachusetts : j . s . & c . adams , 1844 ) . however , a 15 ( adjusted for inflation : 512.78 ) price tag on the book made it too expensive to sell easily , so the amherst firm decided to sell out . merriam acquired rights from adams , as well as signing a contract with webster ’ s heirs for sole rights . '' g & c merriam : where the words of noah webster lived and thrived '' wayne phaneuf , the republican . 1845 printing . the third printing of the second edition was by george and charles merriam of springfield , massachusetts , in 1845 . noah webster , an american dictionary of the english language , second edition ( springfield , massachusetts : george & charles merriam , 1845 ) . this was the first webster 's dictionary with a merriam imprint . . impact . lepore ( 2008 ) demonstrates webster 's innovative ideas about language and politics and shows why webster 's endeavors were at first so poorly received . culturally conservative federalists denounced the work as radical—too inclusive in its lexicon and even bordering on vulgar . meanwhile , webster 's old foes , the jeffersonian republicans , attacked the man , labeling him mad for such an undertaking . jill lepore , '' introduction '' in arthur schulman , websterisms : a collection of words and definitions set forth by the founding father of american english ( free press , 2008 . scholars have long seen webster 's 1844 dictionary to be an important resource for reading poet emily dickinson 's life and work ; she once commented that the '' lexicon '' was her '' only companion '' for years . one biographer said , '' the dictionary was no mere reference book to her ; she read it as a priest his breviary – over and over , page by page , with utter absorption . '' ; ; martha dickinson bianchi , the life and letters of emily dickinson ( 1924 ) p 80 for quote austin ( 2005 ) explores the intersection of lexicographical and poetic practices in american literature , and attempts to map out a '' lexical poetics '' using webster 's dictionaries . he shows the ways in which american poetry has inherited webster and drawn upon his lexicography in order to reinvent it . austin explicates key definitions from both the compendious ( 1806 ) and american ( 1828 ) dictionaries and brings into its discourse a range of concerns including the politics of american english , the question of national identity and culture in the early moments of american independence , and the poetics of citation and of definition . webster 's dictionaries were a redefinition of americanism within the context of an emergent and unstable american socio-political and cultural identity . webster 's identification of his project as a '' federal language '' shows his competing impulses towards regularity and innovation in historical terms . perhaps the contradictions of webster 's project represented a part of a larger dialectical play between liberty and order within revolutionary and post-revolutionary political debates . nathan w . austin , '' lost in the maze of words : reading and re-reading noah webster 's dictionaries , '' dissertation abstracts international , 2005 , vol . 65 issue 12 , p . 4561 . other dictionaries with webster 's name . noah webster 's assistant , and later chief competitor , joseph emerson worcester , and webster 's son-in-law chauncey a . goodrich , published an abridgment of noah webster 's 1828 american dictionary of the english language in 1829 , with the same number of words and webster 's full definitions , but with truncated literary references and expanded etymology . although it was more successful financially than the original 1828 edition and was reprinted many times , noah webster was critical of it . worcester and goodrich 's abridgment of noah webster 's dictionary was published in 1841 by white and sheffield , printed by e . sanderson in elizabethtown , n.j . and again in 1844 by publishers harper and brothers of new york city , in 1844 , with added words as an appendix . new and revised edition 1847 . upon webster 's death in 1843 , the unsold books and all rights to the copyright and name '' webster '' were purchased by brothers george and charles merriam , who then hired webster 's son-in-law chauncey a . goodrich , a professor at yale college , to oversee revisions . goodrich 's new and revised edition appeared on 24 september 1847 , and a revised and enlarged edition in 1848 , which added a section of illustrations indexed to the text . his revisions remained close to webster 's work , but removed what later editors referred to as his '' excrescences '' . british impact . in 1850 , blackie and son in glasgow published the first general dictionary of english that made heavy use of pictorial illustrations integrated with the text , the imperial dictionary , english , technological , and scientific , adapted to the present state of literature , science , and art ; on the basis of webster 's english dictionary . editor john ogilve used webster 's 1841 edition as a base , adding many new , specialized , and british words , increasing the vocabulary from websters 70,000 to more than 100,000 . michael hancher , '' gazing at the imperial dictionary , '' book history , volume 1 , 1998 , pp . 156–181 . unabridged edition 1864 . in response to joseph worcester 's groundbreaking dictionary of 1860 , a dictionary of the english language , the g . & c . merriam company created a significantly revised edition , a dictionary of the english language . it was edited by yale university professor noah porter and published in 1864 , containing 114,000 entries . it was sometimes referred to as the webster–mahn edition , because it featured revisions by dr . c . a . f . mahn , who replaced unsupportable etymologies which were based on webster 's attempt to conform to biblical interpretations of the history of language . it was the first edition to largely overhaul noah webster 's work , and the first to be known as the unabridged . later printings included additional material : a '' supplement of additional words and definitions '' containing more than 4,600 new words and definitions in 1879 , a pronouncing biographical dictionary containing more than 9,700 names of noteworthy persons in 1879 , and a pronouncing gazetteer in 1884 . the 1883 printing of the book contained 1,928 pages and was 8½ in ( 22 & nbsp ; cm ) wide by 11½ in ( 29 & nbsp ; cm ) tall by 4¼ in ( 11 & nbsp ; cm ) thick . the 1888 printing ( revision ? ) is similarly sized , with the last printed page number '' 1935 '' which has on its back further content ( hence , 1936th page ) , and closes with '' whole number of pages 2012 '' . this dictionary carries the 1864 preface by noah porter with postscripts of 1879 and 1884 . james a.h . murray , the editor of the oxford english dictionary ( 1879–1928 ) says webster 's unabridged edition of 1864 '' acquired an international fame . it was held to be superior to every other dictionary and taken as the leading authority on the meaning of words , not only in america and england , but also throughout the far east . '' k . m . elisabeth murray , caught in the web of words : james murray and the oxford english dictionary ( 1977 ) , p 133 . webster 's international dictionary ( 1890 and 1900 ) . porter also edited the succeeding edition , webster ’ s international dictionary of the english language ( 1890 ) , which was an expansion of the american dictionary . it contained about 175,000 entries . in 1900 , webster ’ s international was republished with a supplement that added 25,000 entries to it . in 1898 the collegiate dictionary also was introduced ( see below ) . webster 's new international dictionary 1909 . the merriam company issued a complete revision in 1909 , webster 's new international dictionary , edited by william torrey harris and f . sturges allen . vastly expanded , it covered more than 400,000 entries , and double the number of illustrations . a new format feature , the divided page , was designed to save space by including a section of words below the line at the bottom of each page : six columns of very fine print , devoted to such items as rarely used , obsolete , and foreign words , abbreviations , and variant spellings . notable improvement was made in the treatment and number of discriminated synonyms , comparisons of subtle shades of meaning . also added was a twenty-page chart comparing the webster 's pronunciations with those offered by six other major dictionaries . this edition was reprinted in 1913 . being in the public domain and having been scanned and ocrd , this edition has had substantial influence on wiktionary . webster ’ s new international dictionary ( second edition , 1934 ) . in 1934 , the new international dictionary was revised and expanded for a second edition , which is popularly known as webster ’ s second or w2 , although it was not published under that title . it was edited by william allan neilson and thomas a . knott . it contained 3350 pages and sold for 39.50 ( adjusted for inflation : 755.77 ) . some versions added a 400-page supplement called a reference history of the world , which provided chronology '' from earliest times to the present '' . the editors claimed more than 600,000 entries , more than any other dictionary at that time , but that number included many proper names and newly added lists of undefined '' combination words '' . multiple definitions of words are listed in chronological order , with the oldest , and often obsolete , usages listed first . for example , the first definition of starve includes dying of exposure to the elements as well as from lack of food . the numerous picture plates added to the book 's appeal and usefulness , particularly when pertaining to things found in nature . conversely , the plate showing the coins of the world 's important nations quickly proved to be ephemeral . numerous gold coins from various important countries were included , including american eagles , at a time when it had recently become illegal for americans to own them , and when most other countries had withdrawn gold from active circulation as well . early printings of this dictionary contained the erroneous ghost word dord . because of its style and word coverage , webster 's second is still a popular dictionary . for example , in the case of miller brewing co . v . g . heileman brewing co . , inc . , 561 f.2d 75 ( 7th cir . 1977 ) – a trademark dispute in which the terms '' lite '' and '' light '' were held to be generic for light beer and therefore available for use by anyone – the u.s . court of appeals for the seventh circuit , after considering a definition from webster ’ s third new international dictionary , wrote that '' the comparable definition in the previous , and for many the classic , edition of the same dictionary is as follows : . '' . webster 's third new international dictionary ( 1961 ) . after about a decade of preparation , g . & c . merriam issued the entirely new webster 's third new international dictionary of the english language , unabridged ( commonly known as webster 's third , or w3 ) in september 1961 . although it was an unprecedented masterwork of scholarship , it was met with considerable criticism for its descriptive ( rather than prescriptive ) approach . herbert charles morton , the story of webster 's third : philip gove 's controversial dictionary and its critics ( 1995 ) p . 123 the dictionary 's treatment of '' ai n't '' was subject to particular scorn , since it seemed to overrule the near-unanimous denunciation of that word by english teachers . revisions and updates . since the 1961 publication of the third , merriam-webster has reprinted the main text of the dictionary with only minor corrections . to add new words , they created an addenda section in 1966 , included in the front matter , which was expanded in 1971 , 1976 , 1981 , 1986 , 1993 , and 2002 . however , the rate of additions was much slower than it had been throughout the previous hundred years . following the purchase of merriam-webster by encyclopædia britannica , inc . in 1964 , a three-volume version was issued for many years as a supplement to the encyclopedia . at the end of volume three , this edition included the britannica world language dictionary , 474 pages of translations between english and french , german , italian , spanish , swedish , and yiddish . a cd-rom version of the complete text , with thousands of additional new words and definitions from the '' addenda '' , was published by merriam-webster in 2000 , and is often packaged with the print edition . the third edition was published in 2000 on merriam-webster 's website as a subscription service . planning for a fourth edition of the unabridged began with a 1988 memo from merriam-webster president william llewellyn , but was repeatedly deferred in favor of updates to the more lucrative collegiate . work on a full revision finally began in 2009 . in january 2013 the third new international website service was rebranded as the unabridged with the first '' release '' of 4,800 new and revised entries added to the site . there were two further '' releases '' in 2014 . the revised website is not branded as the '' fourth edition '' and it is unlikely that a print version will ever be produced , because demand is declining and its increased size would make it unwieldy and expensive . . merriam-webster 's collegiate dictionary . merriam-webster introduced its collegiate dictionary in 1898 and the series is now in its eleventh edition . following the publication of webster 's international in 1890 , two collegiate editions were issued as abridgments of each of their unabridged editions . with the ninth edition ( webster 's ninth new collegiate dictionary ( wnncd ) , published in 1983 ) , the collegiate adopted changes which distinguish it as a separate entity rather than merely an abridgment of the third new international ( the main text of which has remained virtually unrevised since 1961 ) . some proper names were returned to the word list , including names of knights of the round table . the most notable change was the inclusion of the date of the first known citation of each word , to document its entry into the english language . the eleventh edition ( published in 2003 ) includes more than 225,000 definitions , and more than 165,000 entries . a cd-rom of the text is sometimes included . this dictionary is preferred as a source '' for general matters of spelling '' by the chicago manual of style , which is followed by many book publishers and magazines in the united states . the chicago manual states that it '' normally opts for '' the first spelling listed . the chicago manual of style , 15th edition , new york and london : university of chicago press , 2003 , chapter 7 : '' spelling , distinctive treatment of words , and compounds '' , section 7.1 '' introduction '' , p 278 in addition to its collegiate editions g . & c . merriam co . also produced abridged editions for students ( primary school , elementary school , secondary school , high school , common school , academic ) as well as for general public ( condensed , practical , handy ) . the first edition of the abridged primary school dictionary was prepared by noah webster in 1833 and later revised by william g . webster and william a . wheeler . editions . below is a list of years of publication of the collegiate dictionaries . 1st : 1898 2nd : 1910 3rd : 1916 4th : 1931 5th : 1936 6th : 1949 7th : 1963 8th : 1973 9th : 1983 10th : 1993 11th : 2003 . the name webster used by others . since the late 19th century , dictionaries bearing the name webster 's have been published by companies other than merriam-webster . some of these were unauthorized reprints of noah webster 's work ; some were revisions of his work . one such revision was webster 's imperial dictionary , based on john ogilvie 's the imperial dictionary of the english language , itself an expansion of noah webster 's american dictionary . following legal action by merriam , successive us courts ruled by 1908 that webster 's entered the public domain when the unabridged did , in 1889 . g . & c . merriam co . v . ogilvie , 159 fed . 638 ( 1908 ) in 1917 , a us court ruled that webster 's entered the public domain in 1834 when noah webster 's 1806 dictionary 's copyright lapsed . thus , webster 's became a genericized trademark and others were free to use the name on their own works . since then , use of the name webster has been rampant . merriam-webster goes to great pains to remind dictionary buyers that it alone is the heir to noah webster . although merriam-webster revisers find solid ground in noah webster 's concept of the english language as an ever-changing tapestry , the issue is more complicated than that . throughout the 20th century , some non-merriam editions , such as webster 's new universal , were closer to webster 's work than contemporary merriam-webster editions . further revisions by merriam-webster came to have little in common with their original source , while the universal , for example , was minimally revised and remained largely out of date . so many dictionaries of varied size and quality have been called webster 's that the name no longer has any specific brand meaning . despite this , many people still recognize and trust the name . thus , webster 's continues as a powerful and lucrative marketing tool . in recent years , even established dictionaries with no direct link to noah webster whatsoever have adopted his name , adding to the confusion . random house dictionaries are now called random house webster 's , and microsoft 's encarta world english dictionary is now encarta webster 's dictionary . the dictionary now called webster 's new universal no longer even uses the text of the original webster 's new universal dictionary , but rather is a newly commissioned version of the random house dictionary . the webster 's online dictionary : the rosetta edition is not linked to merriam-webster online . it is a multilingual online dictionary created in 1999 by philip m . parker . this site compiles different online dictionaries and encyclopedia including the webster 's revised unabridged dictionary ( 1913 ) , wiktionary and wikipedia . . competition . noah webster 's main competitor was a man named joseph emerson worcester , whose 1830 comprehensive pronouncing and explanatory dictionary of the english language brought accusations of plagiarism from webster . the rivalry was carried on by merriam after webster 's death , in what is often referred to as the '' dictionary wars '' . after worcester 's death in 1865 , revision of his dictionary of the english language was soon discontinued and it eventually went out of print . the american edition of charles annandale 's four volume revision of the imperial dictionary of the english language , published in 1883 by the century company , was more comprehensive than the unabridged . the century dictionary , an expansion of the imperial first published from 1889 to 1891 , covered a larger vocabulary until the publication of webster 's second in 1934 , after the century had ceased publication . in 1894 came funk & wagnalls standard dictionary , an attractive one volume counterpart to webster 's international . the expanded new standard of 1913 was a worthy challenge to the new international , and remained a major competitor for many years . however , funk & wagnalls never revised the work , reprinting it virtually unchanged for more than 50 years , while merriam published two major revisions . the oxford english dictionary ( oed ) , which published its complete first edition in 1933 , challenged merriam in scholarship , though not in the marketplace due to its much larger size . the new international editions continued to offer words and features not covered by the oed , and vice versa . in the 1970s , the oed began publishing supplements to its dictionary and in 1989 integrated the new words in the supplements with the older definitions and etymologies in its second edition . between the 1930s and the 1950s , several college dictionaries , notably the american college dictionary and ( non-merriam ) webster 's new world dictionary , entered the market alongside the collegiate . among larger dictionaries during this period was ( non-merriam ) webster 's universal dictionary ( also published as webster 's twentieth century dictionary ) which traced its roots to noah webster and called itself '' unabridged '' , but had less than half the vocabulary and paled in scholarship against the merriam editions . after the commercial success of webster 's third new international in the 1960s , random house responded by adapting its college dictionary by adding more illustrations and large numbers of proper names , increasing its print size and page thickness , and giving it a heavy cover . in 1966 , it was published as a new '' unabridged '' dictionary . it was expanded in 1987 , but it still covered no more than half the actual vocabulary of webster 's third . the american heritage publishing co . , highly critical of webster 's third , failed in an attempt to buy out merriam-webster and determined to create its own dictionary , the american heritage dictionary of the english language . in 1969 , it issued a college-sized dictionary . now in its fifth edition , it is only slightly greater in vocabulary than the collegiate , but it appears much larger and has the appeal of many pictures and other features . other medium-sized dictionaries have since entered the market , including the new oxford american and the encarta webster 's , while merriam-webster has not attempted to compete by issuing a similar edition .