Genital wart

signs and symptoms . they may be found anywhere in the anal or genital area , and are frequently found on external surfaces of the body , including the penile shaft , scrotum , or labia majora of the vagina . they can also occur on internal surfaces like the urethral meatus , inside the vagina , on the cervix , or in the anus . they can be as small as 1-5mm in diameter , but can also grow or spread into large masses in the genital or anal area . in some cases they look like small stalks . they may be hard ( '' keratinized '' ) or soft . their color can be variable , and sometimes they may bleed . in most cases , there are no symptoms of hpv infection other than the warts themselves . sometimes warts may cause itching , redness , or discomfort , especially when they occur around the anus . although they are usually without other physical symptoms , an outbreak of genital warts may cause psychological distress , such as anxiety , in some people . . causes . transmission . hpv is most commonly transmitted through penetrative sex . while hpv can also be transmitted via non-penetrative sexual activity , it is less transmissible than via penetrative sex . there is conflicting evidence about the effect of condoms on transmission of low-risk hpv . some studies have suggested that they are effective at reducing transmission . other studies suggest that condoms are not effective at preventing transmission of the low-risk hpv variants that cause genital warts . the effect of condoms on hpv transmission may also be sex-dependent ; there is some evidence that condoms are more effective at preventing infection of males than of females . the types of hpv that cause warts are highly transmissible . roughly three out of four unaffected partners of patients with warts develop them within eight months . other studies of partner concordance suggest that the presence of visible warts may be an indicator of increased infectivity ; hpv concordance rates are higher in couples where one partner has visible warts . . latency and recurrence . although 90 % of hpv infections are cleared by the body within two years of infection , it is possible for infected cells to undergo a latency ( quiet ) period , with the first occurrence or a recurrence of symptoms happening months or years later . latent hpv , even with no outward symptoms , is still transmissible to a sexual partner . if an individual has unprotected sex with an infected partner , there is a 70 % chance that he or she will also become infected . in individuals with a history of previous hpv infection , the appearance of new warts may be either from a new exposure to hpv , or from a recurrence of the previous infection . as many as one-third of people with warts will experience a recurrence . . children . anal or genital warts may be vertical transmission . the presence of wart-like lesions on the genitals of young children has been suggested as an indicator of sexual abuse . however , genital warts can sometimes result from autoinoculation by warts elsewhere on the body , such as from the hands . it has also been reported from sharing of swimsuits , underwear , or bath towels , and from non-sexual touching during routine care such as diapering . genital warts in children are less likely to be caused by hpv subtypes 6 and 11 than adults , and more likely to be caused by hpv types that cause warts elsewhere on the body ( '' cutaneous types '' ) . surveys of pediatricians who are child abuse specialists suggest that in children younger than 4 years old , there is no consensus on whether the appearance of new anal or genital warts , by itself , can be considered an indicator of sexual abuse . . diagnosis . image : anal condyloma ( 3 ) . jpg thumb right micrograph of a genital wart with the characteristic changes ( parakeratosis , koilocytes , papillomatosis ) . h & e stain . the diagnosis of genital warts is most often made visually , but may require confirmation by biopsy in some cases . smaller warts may occasionally be confused with molluscum contagiosum . genital warts , histopathology , characteristically rise above the skin surface due to enlargement of the dermal papillae , have parakeratosis and the characteristic nuclear changes typical of hpv infections ( nuclear enlargement with perinuclear clearing ) . dna tests are available for diagnosis of high-risk hpv infections . because genital warts are caused by low-risk hpv types , dna tests can not be used for diagnosis of genital warts or other low-risk hpv infections . some practitioners use an acetic acid solution to identify smaller warts ( '' subclinical lesions '' ) , but this practice is controversial . because a diagnosis made with acetic acid will not meaningfully affect the course of the disease , and can not be verified by a more specific test , a 2007 uk guideline advises against its use . . prevention . gardasil ( sold by merck & co . ) is a vaccine that protects against human papillomavirus types 6 , 11 , 16 and 18 . types 6 and 11 cause genital warts , while 16 and 18 cause cervical cancer . the vaccine is preventive , not therapeutic , and must be given before exposure to the virus type to be effective , ideally before the beginning of sexual activity . the vaccine is approved by the us food and drug administration for use in both males and females as early as 9 years of age . in the uk , gardasil replaced cervarix in september 2012 for reasons unrelated to safety . cervarix had been used routinely in young females from its introduction in 2008 , but was only effective against the high-risk hpv types 16 and 18 , neither of which typically causes warts . management . there is no cure for hpv . existing treatments are focused on the removal of visible warts , but these may also regress on their own without any therapy . there is no evidence to suggest that removing visible warts reduces transmission of the underlying hpv infection . as many as 80 % of people with hpv will clear the infection within 18 months . a healthcare practitioner may offer one of several ways to treat warts , depending on their number , sizes , locations , or other factors . all treatments can potentially cause depigmentation , itching , pain , or scar . treatments can be classified as either physically ablation , or topical agents . physically ablative therapies are considered more effective at initial wart removal , but like all therapies have significant recurrence rates . many therapies , including folk remedies , have been suggested for treating genital warts , some of which have little evidence to suggest they are effective or safe . those listed here are ones mentioned in national or international practice guidelines as having some basis in evidence for their use . physical ablation . physically ablative methods are more likely to be effective on keratinized warts . they are also most appropriate for patients with fewer numbers of relatively smaller warts . simple excision , such as with scissors under local anesthesia , is highly effective . liquid nitrogen cryosurgery is usually performed in an office visit , at weekly intervals . it is effective , inexpensive , safe for pregnancy , and does not usually cause scarring . electrocauterization ( sometimes called '' loop electrical excision procedure '' or leep ) is procedure with a longer history of use , and is considered effective . laser ablation has less evidence to suggest its use . it may be less effective than other ablative methods . it is extremely expensive , and often used as a last resort . formal surgical procedures , performed by a surgeon under general anesthesia or spinal anesthesia may be necessary for larger or more extensive warts , intra-anal warts , or warts in children . it carries a greater risk of scarring than other methods . . topical agents . a 0.15–0.5 % podophyllotoxin ( also called podofilox ) solution in a gel or cream . it can be applied by the patient to the affected area and is not washed off . it is the purified and standardized active ingredient of the podophyllin ( see below ) . podofilox is safer and more effective than podophyllin . skin erosion and pain are more commonly reported than with imiquimod and sinecatechins . its use is cycled ( 2 times per day for 3 days then 4–7 days off ) ; one review states that it should only be used for four cycles . imiquimod is a topical immune response cream , applied to the affected area . it causes less local irritation than podofilox but may cause fungal infections ( 11 % in package insert ) and flu-like symptoms ( less than 5 % disclosed in package insert ) . sinecatechins is an ointment of catechins ( 55 % epigallocatechin gallate ) extracted from green tea and other components . mode of action is undetermined . it appears to have higher clearance rates than podophyllotoxin and imiquimod and causes less local irritation , but clearance takes longer than with imiquimod . trichloroacetic acid ( tca ) is less effective than cryosurgery , and is not recommended for use in the vagina , cervix , or urinary meatus . interferon can be used ; it is effective , but it is also expensive and its effect is inconsistent . ; discontinued a 5 % 5-fluorouracil ( 5-fu ) cream was used , but it is no longer considered an acceptable treatment due to the side-effects . podophyllin , podofilox and isotretinoin should not be used during pregnancy , as they could cause birth defects in the fetus . epidemiology . genital hpv infections have an estimated prevalence in the us of 10–20 % and clinical manifestations in 1 % of the sexually active adult population . us incidence of hpv infection has increased between 1975 and 2006 . about 80 % of those infected are between the ages of 17–33 . although treatments can remove the warts , they do not remove the hpv , so warts can recur after treatment ( about 50–73 % of the time cdc . ( 2004 ) . report to congress : prevention of genital human papillomavirus infection . ) . warts can also spontaneously regress ( with or without treatment ) . traditional theories postulated that the virus remained in the body for a lifetime . however , studies using sensitive dna techniques have shown that through immunological response , the virus can either be cleared or suppressed to levels below what polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) tests can measure . one study testing genital skin for subclinical hpv using pcr found a prevalence of 10 % . . etymology . a condyloma acuminatum is a single genital wart , and condylomata acuminata are multiple genital warts . the word roots mean '' pointed wart '' ( from greek κόνδυλος , '' knuckle '' , greek -ωμα -oma , '' disease , '' and latin acuminatum '' pointed '' ) . although similarly named , it is not the same as condyloma latum , which is a complication of secondary syphilis . references . external links .