Trinitron

history . color television . color television had been studied , but it was only in the late 1940s that the problem was seriously considered . at the time , a number of systems were being proposed that used separate red , green and blue signals ( rgb ) , broadcast in succession . most systems broadcast entire frames in sequence , with a colored filter ( or '' gel '' ) that rotated in front of an otherwise conventional black and white television tube . because they broadcast separate signals for the different colors , all of these systems were incompatible with existing black and white sets . another problem was that the mechanical filter made them flicker unless very high refresh rates were used . in spite of these problems , the united states federal communication commission selected a sequential-frame 144 frame/s standard from cbs as their color broadcast in 1950 . ed reitan , '' cbs field sequential color system '' , 24 august 1997 rca worked along different lines entirely , using the luminance-chrominance system . this system did not directly encode or transmit the rgb signals ; instead it combined these colors into one overall brightness figure , the '' luminance '' . luminance closely matched the black and white signal of existing broadcasts , allowing it to be displayed on existing televisions . this was a major advantage over the mechanical systems being proposed by other groups . color information was then separately encoded and folded into the signal as a high-frequency modification to produce a composite video signal & ndash ; on a black and white television this extra information would be seen as a slight randomization of the image intensity , but the limited resolution of existing sets made this invisible in practice . on color sets the signal would be extracted , decoded back into rgb , and displayed . although rca 's system had enormous benefits , it had not been successfully developed because it was difficult to produce the display tubes . black and white tvs used a continuous signal and the tube could be coated with an even deposit of phosphor . with the compatible color encoding scheme originally developed by georges valensi in 1938 , the color was changing continually along the line , which was far too fast for any sort of mechanical filter to follow . instead , the phosphor had to be broken down into a discrete pattern of colored spots . focusing the right signal on each of these tiny spots was beyond the capability of electron guns of the era , and rca 's early experiments used three-tube projectors , or mirror-based systems known as '' triniscope '' . ed reitan , '' rca dot sequential color system '' , 28 august 1997 . shadow masks . rca eventually solved the problem of displaying the color images with their introduction of the shadow mask . the shadow mask consists of a thin sheet of steel with tiny holes photo etched into it , placed just behind the front surface of the picture tube . three guns , arranged in a triangle , were all aimed at the holes . stray electrons at the edge of the beam were cut off by the mask , creating a sharply focused spot that was small enough to hit a single colored phosphor on the screen . since each of the guns was aimed at the hole from a slightly different angle , the spots of phosphor on the tube could be separated slightly to prevent overlap . the disadvantage of this approach was that for any given amount of gun power , the shadow mask filtered out the majority of the energy . to ensure there was no overlap of the beam on the screen , the dots had to be separated and covered perhaps 25 % of its surface . this led to very dim images , requiring much greater electron beam power in order to provide a useful picture . moreover , the system was highly dependent on the relative angles of the beams between the three guns , which required constant adjustment by the user to ensure the guns hit the correct colors . in spite of this , the technical superiority of the rca system was overwhelming compared to the cbs system , and was selected as the new ntsc standard in 1953 . the first broadcast using the new standard occurred on new year 's day in 1954 , when nbc broadcast the tournament of roses parade . ( blog about this article , ( archived may 4 , 2019 ) in spite of this early start , only a few years after regularly scheduled television broadcasting had begun , consumer uptake of color televisions was very slow to start . the dim images , constant adjustments and high costs had kept them in a niche of their own . low consumer acceptance led to a lack of color programming , further reducing the demand for the sets in a supply and demand problem . in the united states in 1960 , only 1 color set was sold for every 50 sets sold in total . sony , pg . 42 . chromatron . sony had entered the television market in 1960 with the black and white tv8-301 , the first non-projection type all-transistor television . a combination of factors , including its small screen size , limited its sales to niche markets . sony engineers had been studying the color market , but the situation in japan was even worse than the u.s . ; they accounted for only 300 of the 9 million sets sold that year . but by 1961 , dealers were asking the sony sales department when a color set would be available , and the sales department put pressure on engineering in turn . masaru ibuka , sony 's president and co-founder , steadfastly refused to develop a system based on rca 's shadow mask design , which he considered technically deficient . he insisted on developing a unique solution . sony , pg . 43 in 1961 , a sony delegation was visiting the ieee trade show in new york city , including ibuka , akio morita ( sony 's other co-founder ) and nobutoshi kihara , who was promoting his new cv-2000 home video tape recorder . this was kihara 's first trip abroad and he spent much of his time wandering the trade floor , where he came across a small booth by the small company autometric . they were demonstrating a new type of color television based on the chromatron tube , which used a single electron gun and a vertical grille of electrically charged thin wires instead of a shadow mask . the resulting image was far brighter than anything the rca design could produce , and lacked the convergence problems that required constant adjustments . he quickly brought morita and ibuka to see the design , and morita was '' sold '' on the spot . sony , pg . 44 morita arranged a deal with paramount pictures , who was paying for chromatic labs ' development of the chromatron , taking over the entire project . in early 1963 , senri miyaoka was sent to manhattan to arrange the transfer of the technology to sony , which would lead to the closing of chromatic labs . he was unimpressed with the labs , describing the windowless basement as '' squalor '' . the american team was only too happy to point out the serious flaws in the chromatron system , telling miyaoka that the design was hopeless . by september 1964 , a 17-inch prototype had been built in japan , but mass-production test runs were demonstrating serious problems . sony engineers were unable to make a version of chromatron that could be reliably mass-produced . when sets were finally made available in late 1964 , they were put on the market at a competitive 198,000 yen ( us 550 ) , but cost the company over 400,000 yen ( us 1111.11 ) to produce . ibuka had bet the company on chromatron and had already set up a new factory to produce them with the hopes that the production problems would be ironed out and the line would become profitable . after several thousand sets had shipped , the situation was no better , while panasonic and toshiba were in the process of introducing sets based on rca licenses . by 1966 , the chromatron was breaking the company financially . sony , pg . 45 . trinitron . in the autumn of 1966 , ibuka finally gave in , and announced he would personally lead a search for a replacement for chromatron . susumu yoshida was sent to the u.s . to look for potential licenses , and was impressed with the improvements that rca had made in overall brightness by introducing new rare earth phosphors on the screen . he also saw general electric 's '' porta-color '' design , using three guns in a row instead of a triangle , which allowed a greater portion of the screen to be lit . his report was cause for concern in japan , where it seemed sony was falling ever-farther behind the u.s . designs . they might be forced to license the shadow mask system if they wanted to remain competitive . sony , pg . 46 ibuka was not willing to give up entirely , and had his 30 engineers explore a wide variety of approaches to see if they could come up with their own design . at one point , yoshida asked senri miyaoka if the in-line gun arrangement used by ge could be replaced by a single gun with three cathodes ; this would be more difficult to build , but be lower cost in the long run . miyaoka built a prototype and was astonished by how well it worked , although it had focusing problems . later that week , on saturday , miyaoka was summoned to ibuka 's office while he was attempting to leave work to attend his weekly cello practice . yoshida had just informed ibuka about his success , and the two asked miyaoka if they could really develop the gun into a workable product . miyaoka , anxious to leave , answered yes , excused himself , and left . the following monday , ibuka announced that sony would be developing a new color television tube , based on miyaoka 's prototype . sony , pg . 47 by february 1967 , the focusing problems had been solved , and because there was a single gun , the focusing was achieved with permanent magnets instead of a coil , and required no manual adjustments after manufacturing . during development , sony engineer akio ohgoshi introduced another modification . ge 's system improved on the rca shadow mask by replacing the small round holes with slightly larger rectangles . since the guns were in-line , their electrons would land onto three rectangular patches instead of three smaller spots , about doubling the lit area . ohgoshi proposed removing the mask entirely and replacing it with a series of vertical slots instead , lighting the entire screen . although this would require the guns to be very carefully aligned with the phosphors on the tube in order to ensure they hit the right colors , with miyaoka 's new tube , this appeared possible . in practice , this proved easy to build but difficult to place in the tube & ndash ; the fine wires were mechanically weak and tended to move when the tubes were bumped , resulting in shifting colors on the screen . this problem was solved by running several fine tungsten wires across the grille horizontally to keep the vertical wires of the grille in place . the combination of three-in-one electron gun and the replacement of the shadow mask with the aperture grille resulted in a unique and easily patentable product . in spite of trinitron and chromatron having no technology in common , the shared single electron gun has led to many erroneous claims that the two are very similar , or the same . '' sony trinitron color television receiver , c 1970 '' is a common publication claiming that trinitron and chromatron are the same . . introduction , early models . officially introduced by ibuka in april 1968 , the original 12 & nbsp ; inch trinitron had a display quality that easily surpassed any commercial set in terms of brightness , color fidelity , and simplicity of operation . the vertical wires in the aperture grille meant that the tube had to be nearly flat vertically ; this gave it a unique cylindrical look . it was also all solid state , with the exception of the picture tube itself , which allowed it to be much more compact and cool running than designs like ge 's porta-color . some larger models such as the kv-1320ub for the united kingdom market were initially fitted with 3at2 valves for the extra high tension ( high voltage ) circuitry , before being redesigned as solid state in the early 70s . ibuka ended the press conference by claiming that 10,000 sets would be available by october , well beyond what engineering had told him was possible . ibuka cajoled yoshida to take over the effort of bringing the sets into production , and although yoshida was furious at being put in charge of a task he felt was impossible , he finally accepted the assignment and successfully met the production goal . sony , pg . 48 the kv-1210 was introduced in limited numbers in japan in october as promised , and in the u.s . as the kv-1210u the following year . early color sets intended for the uk market had a pal decoder that was different from those invented and licensed by telefunken of germany , who invented the pal color system . the decoder inside the uk-sold sony color trinitron sets , from the kv-1300ub to the kv-1330ub , had an ntsc decoder adapted for pal . the decoder used a 64 microsecond delay line to store every other line , but instead of using the delay line to average out the phase of the current line and the previous line , it simply repeated the same line twice . any phase errors could then be compensated for by using a tint control knob on the front of the set , normally unneeded on a pal set . reception . reviews of the trinitron were universally positive , although they all mentioned its high cost . sony won an emmy award for the trinitron in 1973 . on his 84th birthday in 1992 , ibuka claimed the trinitron was his proudest product . new models quickly followed . larger sizes at 19 '' and then 27 '' were introduced , as well as smaller , including a 7 '' portable . in the mid-1980s , a new phosphor coating was introduced that was much darker than earlier sets , giving the screens a black color when turned off , as opposed to the earlier light grey . this improved the contrast range of the picture . early models were generally packaged in silver cases , but with the introduction of the darker screens , sony also introduced new cases with a dark charcoal color , following a similar change in color taking place in the hi-fi world . this line expanded with 32 '' , 35 '' and finally 40 '' units in the 1990s . in 1990 , sony released the first hd trinitron tv set , for use with the multiple sub-nyquist sampling encoding standard . in 1980 , sony introduced the '' profeel '' line of prosumer component televisions , consisting of a range of trinitron monitors that could be connected to standardized tuners . the original lineup consisted of the kx-20xx1 20 '' and kx-27xx1 27 '' monitors ( the '' xx '' is an identifier , ps for europe , hf for japan , etc . ) the vtx-100es tuner and txt-100g teletext decoder . they were often used with a set of ss-x1a stereo speakers , which matched the grey boxy styling of the suite . '' kx-20ps1 '' the concept was to build a market similar to contemporary stereo equipment , where components from different vendors could be mixed to produce a complete system . however , a lack of any major third party components , along with custom connectors between the tuner and monitors , meant that systems mixing fully compatible elements were never effectively realized . they were popular high-end units , however , and found a strong following in production companies where the excellent quality picture made them effective low-cost monitors . a second series of all-black units followed in 1986 , the profeel pro , sporting a space-frame around the back of the trapezoidal enclosure that doubled as a carrying handle and holder for the pop-out speakers . these units were paired with the vt-x5r tuner and optionally the apm-x5a speakers . '' sony profeel '' sony also produced lines of trinitron professional studio monitors , the pvm ( professional video monitor ) and bvm ( broadcast video monitor ) lines . these models were packaged in grey metal cubes with a variety of inputs that accepted practically any analog format . they originally used tubes similar to the profeel line , but over time , they gradually increased in resolution until the late 1990s when they offered over 900 lines . when these were cancelled as part of the wider trinitron shutdown in 2007 , professionals forced sony to re-open two of the lines to produce the 20 and 14 & nbsp ; inch models . among similar products , sony produced the kv-1311 monitor/tv combination . it accepted ntsc-compatible video from various devices as well as analog broadcast tv . along with its other functions , it had video and audio inputs and outputs as well as a wideband sound-if decoded output . its exterior looks much like the monitor illustrated here , with added tv controls . by this time , sony was well established as a supplier of reliable equipment ; it was preferable to have minimal field failures instead of supporting an extensive service network for the entire united states . sony started developing the trinitron for computer monitor use in the late 1970s . demand was high , so high that there were examples of third party companies removing trinitron tubes from televisions to use as monitors . in response , sony started development of the gdm ( graphic display monitor ) in 1983 , which offered high resolution and faster refresh rates . sony aggressively promoted the gdm and it became a standard on high-end monitors by the late 1980s . particularly common models include the apple inc . 13 '' model that was originally sold with the macintosh ii starting in 1987 . well known users also included digital equipment corporation , ibm , silicon graphics , sun microsystems and others . demand for a lower cost solution led to the cdp series . in may 1988 , the high-end 20 & nbsp ; inch ddm model ( data display monitor ) was introduced with a maximum resolution of 2,048 by 2,048 , which went on to be used in the faa 's advanced automation system air traffic control system . these developments meant that sony was well placed to introduce high-definition televisions ( hdtv ) . in april 1981 , they announced the sony hdvs ( hdvs ) , a suite of muse equipment including cameras , recorders , trinitron monitors and projection tvs . sony shipped its 100 millionth trinitron screen in july 1994 , 25 years after it had been introduced . new uses in the computer field and the demand for higher resolution televisions to match the quality of dvd when it was introduced in 1996 led to increased sales , with another 180 million units delivered in the next decade . '' sony pulls plug on historic trinitron tv '' , ieee spectrum online '' sony to stop making old-style cathode ray tube tvs '' , wall street journal marketwatch ' , 3 march 2008 . end of trinitron . thumb thumb sony 's patent on the trinitron display ran out in 1996 , after 20 years . after the expiration of sony 's trinitron patent , manufacturers like mitsubishi ( whose monitor production is now part of nec display solutions ) were free to use the trinitron design for their own product line without license from sony although they could not use the trinitron name . for example , mitsubishi 's are called diamondtron . to some degree , the name trinitron became a generic term referring to any similar set . sony responded with the fd trinitron , which used computer-controlled feedback systems to ensure sharp focus across a flat screen . initially introduced on their 27 , 32 and 36 & nbsp ; inch models in 1998 , the new tubes were offered in a variety of resolutions for different uses . the basic wega models supported normal 480i signals , but a larger version offered 16:9 aspect ratios . the technology was quickly applied to the entire trinitron range , from 13 to 36 & nbsp ; inch . high resolution versions , hi-scan and super fine pitch , were also produced . with the introduction of the fd trinitron , sony also introduced a new industrial style , leaving the charcoal colored sets introduced in the 1980s for a new silver styling . sony was not the only company producing flat screen crts . other companies had already introduced high-end brands with flat-screen tubes , like panasonic 's tau . many other companies entered the market quickly , widely copying the new silver styling as well . the fd trinitron was unable to regain the cachet that the trinitron brand had previously possessed ; in the 2004 christmas season , they increased sales by 5 % , but only at the cost of a 75 % plunge in profits after being forced to lower costs to compete in the market . at the same time , the introduction of plasma televisions , and then lcd-based ones , led to the high-end market being increasingly focused on the '' thin '' sets . both of these technologies have well known problems , and for some time sony explored a wide array of technologies that would improve upon them in the same way the trinitron did on the shadow mask . among these experiments were organic light-emitting diodes ( oled ) and the field emission display , but in spite of considerable effort , neither of these technologies matured into competitors . sony also introduced their plasmatron displays , and later lcd as well , but these had no inherent technical advantages over similar sets from other companies . from 2006 , all of sony 's bravia television products are lcd displays , initially based on screens from samsung , and later sharp . sony eventually ended production of the trinitron in japan in 2004 . in 2006 , sony announced that it would no longer market or sell trinitrons in the united states or canada , but it would continue to sell the trinitron in china , india , and regions of south america using tubes delivered from their singapore plant . production in singapore finally ended in march 2008 , only months after ending production of their rear-projection systems . two lines of the factory were later brought back online to supply the professional market . 280 million trinitron tubes were built . at its peak , 20 million were made annually . spectrum.ieee.org , 5 march 2008 , '' sony pulls plug on historic trinitron tv '' , retrieved 9 june 2020 . . description . basic concept . the trinitron design incorporates two unique features : the single-gun three-cathode picture tube , and the vertically aligned aperture grille . the single gun consists of a long-necked tube with a single electrode at its base , flaring out into a horizontally-aligned rectangular shape with three rectangular cathodes inside . each cathode is fed the amplified signal from one of the decoded rgb signals . the electrons from the cathodes are all aimed toward a single point at the back of the screen where they hit the aperture grille , a steel sheet with vertical slots cut in it . due to the slight separation of the cathodes at the back of the tube , the three beams approach the grille at slightly different angles . when they pass through the grille they retain this angle , hitting their individual colored phosphors that are deposited in vertical stripes on the inside of the faceplate . the main purpose of the grille is to ensure that each beam strikes only the phosphor stripes for its color , much as does a shadow mask . however , unlike a shadow mask , there are essentially no obstructions along each entire phosphor stripe . larger crts have a few horizontal stabilizing wires part way between top and bottom . advantages . in comparison to early shadow mask designs , the trinitron grille cuts off much less of the signal coming from the electron guns . rca tubes built in the 1950s cut off about 85 % of the electron beam , while the grille cuts off about 25 % . improvements to the shadow mask designs continually narrowed this difference between the two designs , and by the late 1980s the difference in performance , at least theoretically , was eliminated . another advantage of the aperture grille was that the distance between the wires remained constant vertically across the screen . in the shadow mask design , the size of the holes in the mask is defined by the required resolution of the phosphor dots on the screen , which was constant . however , the distance from the guns to the holes changed ; for dots near the center of the screen , the distance was its shortest , at points in the corners it was at its maximum . to ensure that the guns were focused on the holes , a system known as dynamic convergence had to constantly adjust the focus point as the beam moved across the screen . in the trinitron design , the problem was greatly simplified , requiring changes only for large screen sizes , and only on a line-by-line basis . for this reason , trinitron systems are easier to focus than shadow masks , and generally had a sharper image . this was a major selling point of the trinitron design for much of its history . in the 1990s , new computer-controlled real-time feedback focusing systems eliminated this advantage , as well as leading to the introduction of '' true flat '' designs . disadvantages . . visible support or damping wires . even small changes in the alignment of the grille over the phosphors can cause the color purity to shift . since the wires are thin , small bumps can cause the wires to shift alignment if they are not held in place . monitors using trinitron technology have one or more thin tungsten wires running horizontally across the grille to prevent this . screens 15 '' and below have one wire located about two thirds of the way down the screen , while monitors greater than 15 '' have 2 wires at the one-third and two-thirds positions . these wires are less apparent or completely obscured on standard definition sets due to wider scan lines to match the lower resolution of the video being displayed . on computer monitors , where the scan lines are much closer together , the wires are often visible . this is a minor drawback of the trinitron standard which is not shared by shadow mask crts . aperture grilles are not as mechanically stable as shadow or slot masks ; a tap can cause the image to briefly become distorted , even with damping/support wires . some people may find the wires to be distracting . . anti-glare coating . a polyurethane sheet coated to scatter reflections is affixed to the front of the screen , where it can be damaged . partial list of other aperture grille brands . gateway computer '' vivitron '' mag innovision '' technitron '' nec display solutions ( nec/mitsubishi ) '' diamondtron '' samsung '' hitron '' viewsonic '' sonictron '' . see also . history of television . references . notes . . bibliography . . external links . trinitron : sony 's once unbeatable product sony trinitron explained