Midge (Barbie)

vintage years . when barbie first came out , she was the subject of a lot of criticism , some of which that claimed barbie was too mature-looking for children . midge was the first same-size friend of barbie ever sold , and was created to oppose these controversies aimed at barbie . she had a fuller , gentler face mold , although her body proportions were the same as barbie and they both stood at tall . this allowed the two dolls to be able to share clothes and accessories . her head mold was stamped '' 1958 '' , the same as barbie . when midge arrived , the markings on the straight leg body mold they shared changed to include both her and barbie . midge had shoulder-length hair that flipped at the ends . buyers had an option of buying a doll with one of three different hair colors : red , blond , or brunette . her face was usually brushed with freckles . the dolls that were sold without freckles had a longer hair style and are now hard to find . depending on the doll 's hair color , the color of her two-piece swimsuit varied . if midge had red hair her swimsuit was yellow and orange , for blond hair it was in two shades of blue , and if she was brunette it was pink and red . the first vintage midge dolls had a value of 175 mib ( mint in box ) in 2007 . for the first two years that midge was sold , she had '' straight legs '' that could not bend at the knee . a rare midge with teeth was sold the first year and is now sought after by collectors . one year later , in 1964 the dolls that were sold had slightly longer hair . midge 's boyfriend allan arrived as well . early in 1965 , wigs wardrobe midge was sold , and consisted of a midge head with short molded hair and three wigs . this was the midge counterpart of the fashion queen barbie . since she came with only a head , another doll had to provide for the body . in 1965 midge with bendable legs was introduced . she had shorter '' bobbed '' hair , like the american girl barbie , with a blue headband . her swimming suit was different as well , and was now one-piece and striped . there was also a japanese exclusive midge only offered in japan in the years 1963 and 1964 these dolls were similar to a fashion queen in which they had molded hair but a very different face mould and more of a bouffant shaped head . return . left from her introduction until 1967 , midge was marketed as barbie 's original best friend , but no dolls were sold for about 20 years until 1988 , when california dream midge was sold as part of a beach line , which used the '' steffie '' mold . the same '' steffie '' mold was used for cool times midge in 1989 . in 1990 , she began to use the '' diva '' mold for all stars midge and the beat midge . in 1991 she was married to allan ( now spelled '' alan '' ) . before and after the wedding day midge doll was sold , many midge play line dolls were produced . before wedding day midge , midge dolls still had freckles , but up until hawaii midge was sold in 1999 , the dolls lacked freckles . most of the dolls were red-haired with blue or green eyes , but some dolls were brunette . the most commonly used head mold for midge in this period was the '' diva '' mold , stamped 1985 . a 35th anniversary midge reproduction doll was sold in 1998 for collectors , made to look like the vintage midge dolls . she had red hair , was dressed in her original orange and lime two-piece swimming suit , and came with a reproduction of the senior prom outfit from 1964–1965 as well as a reproduction of the box the midge dolls originally came in . earlier in 1993 , for midge 's 30th anniversary , a midge reproduction doll was also produced , but she did not possess a reproduction of her original swimsuit or the original box . like the later version , she came in a reproduction of the senior prom outfit . in 2013 , midge appeared on the webseries barbie : life in the dreamhouse where it is revealed that she has moved to malibu . with this , her canon has been changed extensively , and she is a teenager who is retro at heart and still uses old-fangled terms . the whole 'happy family ' canon has been dropped altogether due to controversy . two midge dolls were released in 2013 , one is as part of a collectors set with barbie , and the other on her own in the life in the dreamhouse doll line . '' happy family '' line . the year after midge and alan were married , a picture of the couple with twin babies was shown in a pamphlet , but the dolls were never produced . however , in 2003 , she and alan were re-introduced with a family consisting of them and three different kids , three-year-old ryan , and newborn baby nikki . this was known as the '' happy family '' line , and was similar to the discontinued heart family line of the 1980s . the dolls came in both european american and african american versions . this was the first time an african american midge was ever produced . midge was sold '' pregnant '' with nikki , who was a tiny baby inside midge 's magnetic removable womb . this led to some controversy with some consumers saying that the doll was inappropriate for children , or that it promoted teen pregnancy . another cause for this controversy was that midge did not initially have a wedding ring , but this was later fixed . she also was packaged without alan . customers also complaining about the doll led to walmart pulling the happy family line off their shelves . a new version of this midge was produced for walmart , this time is not pregnant and with a cardboard cut-out display of alan and ryan standing next to her inside the box . the happy family line included everything from a talking house , a backyard swimming pool , neighborhood market , and playground . later , around nikki 's first birthday , midge was '' pregnant '' again with another child , who was neither named or given a specific gender , as the gender was a surprise when the owner opened the doll 's box . midge 's new baby was later named cassandra . midge has two known parents who are simply called '' grandpa '' and '' grandma '' . at first , the grandparent dolls were sold together as part of a big set consisting of the dolls and a kitchen play set , but for nikki 's first birthday they were sold separately . midge , alan , and ryan gave nikki a dog for her birthday . they also came in both caucasian and african american versions . they use different body molds , to reflect their age . . head molds . midge 's first appearance was made with her own head mold , vintage midge in 1964 and 1965 the japanese exclusive '' new midge '' face mold was released and was only offered in japan . midge next used the steffie head mold , until the debut of teresa , which took over the steffie head . later , midge used the diva head mold from the '' barbie and the rockers '' set . one version of the florida vacation midge uses the diva sculpt , while an alternative version used the mackie head mold . midge returned to the steffie head mold for the 50th-anniversary version . appearances . midge appears in the web series , barbie : life in the dreamhouse in the episode , ‘ a smidge of midge ’ . notes and references .