Memory Stick

history . the original memory stick , which was launched in october 1998 , was available in capacities up to 128 & nbsp ; mb . in this article the unit symbol 'mb ' is used to mean 1000^2 bytes ( 1 megabyte ) in october 1999 , sony licensed the technology to fujitsu , aiwa , sanyo , sharp , pioneer and kenwood , in a bid to avoid a repetition of the betamax failure . other companies were also licensees to the format . some early examples of memory stick usage by third-party companies include sharp 's mp3 players , alpine 's in-dash players , and epson 's printers . initially the format had a lukewarm reception , but it soon increased in popularity , especially after the licensing deal . in spring 2001 , memory stick attained 25 % market share ( against compactflash 's 40 % and smartmedia 's 32 % ) , up from 7 % a year earlier . by may 2001 , total shipment of memory stick units surpassed 10 million . however the sd card , jointly developed by toshiba , panasonic and sandisk , became widely popular among companies and soon became the most popular flash format by november 2003 it held 42 % market share in the united states , ahead of compactflash 's 26 % and memory stick with 16 % . eventually sony itself became the only company to support the format . sony was often criticized for the memory stick , as they were deemed to be expensive compared to other formats . , it appeared that sony had begun to combine support for sd/sdhc and memory stick formats in their products . all digital cameras and camcorders announced by sony at the ces 2010 could use sd and sdhc cards as well as memory sticks . furthermore , sony is releasing its own line of sd cards . many claim this development as the end of the format war between memory stick and sd card . however , sony did not abandon the format at this time , and has indicated it will continue development of the format for the foreseeable future . a prime example is the development of wifi transfers through a special memory stick pro-duo which is still in development as of 2011 . sony 's first significant migration away from memory stick did not come until 2019 , when it introduced the α7r iv full-frame mirrorless interchangeable-lens camera without memory stick support , opting instead for dual sdxc slots . memory stick cards were almost entirely produced by sony itself . sandisk and lexar were among the few third-party memory stick producers . applications . typically , memory sticks are used as storage media for a portable device , in a form that can easily be removed for access by a personal computer . for example , sony digital camera use memory stick for storing image files . with a memory stick-capable memory card reader a user can copy the pictures taken with the sony digital camera to a computer . sony typically included memory stick reader hardware in its first-party consumer electronics , such as digital cameras , digital audio player , pdas , mobile phone , the vaio line of laptop computers , tv sets under the wega and bravia names , and sony 's handheld gaming device , the playstation portable . a special memory stick can be inserted in the hindquarters of sony 's aibo robot pet , to enable the use of aiboware—software intended for use on aibos . the sticks include a copy protection mechanism used by the robot , allowing users to write programs . these are referred to as programmable or programming . only 8 & nbsp ; mb and 16 & nbsp ; mb versions are available . formats and form factors . memory sticks include a wide range of actual formats , including three different form factors . memory stick . the original memory stick is approximately the size and thickness of a stick of chewing gum . it was available in capacities from 4 & nbsp ; mb to 128 & nbsp ; mb ( 1 mb one million bytes ) . it was available both with and without magicgate support . the magicgate-capable memory sticks were white-colored , while the standard version was purple . the original memory stick is no longer manufactured . memory stick select . in response to the storage limitations of the original memory stick , sony introduced the memory stick select at ces 2003 on january 9 . the memory stick select contained two separate 128 & nbsp ; mb partitions which the user could switch between using a physical switch on the card . this solution was fairly unpopular , but it did give users of older memory stick devices more capacity . its physical size remained the same as the original memory stick . memory stick pro . the memory stick pro , introduced on january 9 , 2003 as a joint effort between sony and sandisk , would be the longer-lasting solution to the space problem . most devices that use the original memory sticks support both the original and pro sticks since both formats have identical form factors . some readers that were not compatible could be upgraded to memory stick pro support via a firmware update . memory stick pros have a marginally higher transfer speed and a maximum theoretical capacity of memory stick pro can be bought . memory stick duo . the memory stick duo was developed in response to sony 's need for a smaller flash memory card for pocket-sized digital cameras , cell phones and the playstation portable . it is slightly smaller than the competing secure digital ( sd ) format and roughly two thirds the length of the standard memory stick form factor , but costs more . memory stick duos are available with the same features as the larger standard memory stick , available with and without high speed mode , and with and without magicgate support . the memory stick pro duo has replaced the memory stick duo due to its 128 & nbsp ; mb size limitation , but has kept the same form factor as the duo . a simple adapter allows memory stick duo to be used in devices designed to accept the original memory stick form factor . memory stick pro duo . the memory stick pro duo ( mspd ) quickly replaced the memory stick duo due to the duo 's size limitation of 128 & nbsp ; mb and slow transfer speed . memory stick pro duos are available in all the same variants as the larger memory stick pro , with and without high speed mode , and with and without magicgate support . sony has released different versions of memory stick pro duo . a memory stick pro duo with magicgate was released as a 512 & nbsp ; mb stick . additionally , a 16 & nbsp ; gb version on march 2008 and another a 32 & nbsp ; gb version on august 21 , 2009 . in 2009 , sony and sandisk also announced the joint development of an expanded memory stick pro format tentatively named '' memory stick pro format for extended high capacity '' . sony has since finalized the format and released its specification under the new name , memory stick xc ( see below ) . . memory stick pro-hg duo . on december 11 , 2006 , sony , together with sandisk , announced the memory stick pro-hg duo . while only serial and 4-bit parallel interfaces are supported in the memory stick pro format , an 8-bit parallel interface was added to the memory stick pro-hg format . also , the maximum interface clock frequency was increased from 40 & nbsp ; mhz to 60 & nbsp ; mhz . with these enhancements , a theoretical transfer rate of 480 & nbsp ; mbit/s ( 60 & nbsp ; mb/s ) is achieved , which is three times faster than the memory stick pro format . memory stick micro ( m2 ) . in a joint venture with sandisk , sony released a new memory stick format on february 6 , 2006 . the memory stick micro ( m2 ) measures 15 × 12.5 × 1.2 & nbsp ; mm ( roughly one-quarter the size of the duo ) with 64 & nbsp ; mb , 128 & nbsp ; mb , 256 & nbsp ; mb , 512 & nbsp ; mb , 1 & nbsp ; gb , 2 & nbsp ; gb , 4 & nbsp ; gb , 8 & nbsp ; gb , and 16 & nbsp ; gb capacities available . the format has a theoretical limit of 32 & nbsp ; gb and maximum transfer speed of 160 & nbsp ; mbit/s . however , as with the pro duo format , it has been expanded through the xc series as memory stick xc micro and memory stick xc-hg micro , both with the theoretical maximum capacity of 2 & nbsp ; tb . in this article the unit symbol 'tb ' is used to mean 1000^4 bytes ( 1 terabyte ) the m2 comes with an adapter , much like the duo sticks , to ensure physical compatibility with memory stick pro devices . however , not all devices with a pro slot are compatible with the m2/adapter combination , as the firmware of older devices do n't support the higher capacity of some m2 cards . one example is certain sony clié pdas which do n't support cards larger than 2 & nbsp ; gb . sony announced on june 1 , 2009 , that m2 support in sony ericsson phones would be dropped in favor of microsd . the sony dsc-rx0 mark ii made a revived usage of m2 slots . memory stick xc . on january 7 , 2009 , sandisk and sony announced the memory stick xc format ( tentatively named '' memory stick format series for extended high capacity '' at the time ) . the memory stick xc has a maximum theoretical 2 & nbsp ; tb capacity , 64 times larger than that of the memory stick pro duo which is limited to 32 & nbsp ; gb . xc series has the same form factors as pro series , and supports magicgate content protection technology as well as access control function as pro series does . in line with the rest of the industry , the xc series uses the newer exfat file system due to size and formatting limitations of fat/fat16/fat32 filesystems used in the pro series . a maximum transfer speed of 480 & nbsp ; mbit/s ( 60 & nbsp ; mbyte/s ) is achieved through 8-bit parallel data transfer . no memory stick xc cards were released to the market , likely due to domination of sd cards ; its equivalent here is named sdxc and eventually became more successful than any other exfat-based memory card format . memory stick pro-hg duo hx . sony announced the release of the memory stick pro-hg duo hx on may 17 , 2011 , which was considered the fastest card ever made by the manufacturer . it measures 20 × 31 × 1.6 & nbsp ; mm , with 8 & nbsp ; gb , 16 & nbsp ; gb , or 32 & nbsp ; gb versions available . also , the format offers a maximum transfer speed of 50 & nbsp ; mb/s . . mark 2 certification . as of early 2008 , mark 2-certified versions of the memory stick pro duo became available . the mark 2 designation indicates the memory stick is suitable for use with avchd recording products or other faster memory stick enabled devices by providing appropriate minimum write performance .