King Tubby

career . king tubby 's first interaction with the music industry came in the late 1950s with the rising popularity of jamaican sound systems , which were to be found all over kingston and which were developing into enterprising businesses . as a talented radio repairman , tubby soon found himself in great demand by most of the major sound systems of kingston , as the tropical weather of the caribbean island ( often combined with sabotage by rival sound system owners ) led to malfunctions and equipment failure . thompson , dave ( 2002 ) reggae & caribbean music , backbeat books , , pp . 138–141 tubby owned an electrical repair shop on drumalie avenue , kingston , that fixed televisions and radios . it was here that he built large amplifiers for the local sound systems . in 1961–62 , he built his own radio transmitter and briefly ran a pirate radio station playing ska and rhythm and blues which he soon shut down when he heard that the police were looking for the perpetrators . '' king jammy interview '' , bbc , 2005 . retrieved 30 april 2016 tubby would eventually form his own sound system , tubby 's hometown hi-fi , in 1968 . bonitto , brian ( 2012 ) '' king tubby , the sound creator '' , jamaica observer , 6 july 2012 , retrieved 13 july 2012 it became a crowd favourite due to the high quality sound of his equipment , exclusive releases and tubby 's own echo and reverb sound effects , at that point something of a novelty . the sound also launched the career of u-roy , its featured toaster . . remixes . tubby began working as a disc cutter for producer duke reid in 1968 . reid , one of the major figures in early jamaican music alongside rival coxsone dodd , ran treasure isle studios , one of jamaica 's first independent production houses , and was a key producer of ska , rocksteady and eventually reggae recordings . before the advent of dub , most jamaican 45s featured an instrumental version of the main song on the flipside , which was called the '' version '' . when tubby was asked to produce versions of songs for sound system mcs or toasters , tubby initially worked to remove the vocal tracks with the faders on reid 's mixing desk , but soon discovered that the various instrumental tracks could be accentuated , reworked and emphasised through the settings on the mixer and primitive early effects units . in time , tubby began to create wholly new pieces of music by shifting the emphasis in the instrumentals , adding sounds and removing others and adding various special effects , like extreme delays , echoes , reverb and phase effects . partly due to the popularity of these early remixes , in 1971 , tubby 's soundsystem consolidated its position as one of the most popular in kingston and tubby decided to open a studio of his own in waterhouse in 1971 , initially using a 4-track mixer purchased from byron lee 's dynamic studio . . dub music production . king tubby 's production work in the 1970s made him one of the best-known celebrities in jamaica , and would generate interest in his production techniques from producers , sound engineers and musicians across the world . tubby built on his considerable knowledge of electronics to repair , adapt and design his own studio equipment , which made use of a combination of old devices and new technologies to produce a studio capable of the precise , atmospheric sounds which would become tubby 's trademark . with a variety of effects units connected to his mixer , tubby '' played '' the mixing desk like an instrument , bringing instruments and vocals in and out of the mix ( literally '' dubbing '' them ) to create an entirely new genre known as dub music . by the end of 1971 he was already providing dub mixes for producers such as glen brown and lee '' scratch '' perry . using existing multitrack master tapes—his small studio in fact had no capacity to record session musicians—tubby would re-tape or '' dub '' the original after passing it through his 12-channel , custom-built mci mixing desk , twisting the songs into unexpected configurations which highlighted the heavy rhythms of their bass and drum parts with minute snatches of vocals , horns , piano and organ . these techniques mirrored the actions of the sound system selectors ( reggae disc jockeys ) , who had long used eq equipment to emphasise certain aspects of particular records , but tubby used his custom-built studio to take this technique into new areas , often transforming a hit song to the point where it was almost unrecognisable from the original version . one unique aspect of his remixes or dubs was the result of creative manipulating of the built-in high-pass filter on the mci mixer he had bought from dynamic studios . the filter was a parametric eq which was controllable by a large knob—aka the '' big knob '' – which allowed tubby to introduce a dramatic narrowing sweep of any signal , such as the horns , until the sound disappeared into a thin squeal . tubby engineered/remixed songs for jamaica 's top producers such as lee perry , bunny lee , augustus pablo and vivian jackson , that featured artists such as johnny clarke , cornell campbell , linval thompson , horace andy , big joe , delroy wilson , jah stitch and many others . in 1973 , he added a second 4-track mixer , and built a vocal booth at his studio so he could record vocal tracks onto the instrumental tapes brought to him by various producers . this process is known as '' voicing '' in jamaican recording parlance . it is unlikely that a complete discography of tubby 's production work could be created based on the number of labels , artists and producers with whom he worked , and also subsequent repressings of these releases sometimes contained contradictory information . his name is credited on hundreds of b-side labels , with the possibility that many others were by his hand yet uncredited , due to similarities with his known work . several albums of tubby 's dub mixes were released , among the earliest the perry-produced blackboard jungle and bunny lee 's dub from the roots ( both 1974 ) . his most famous dub and one of the most popular dubs of all time was '' king tubby meets the rockers uptown '' from 1974 . the original session was for a jacob miller song called '' baby i love you so '' , which featured bob marley 's drummer carlton barrett playing a traditional one drop rhythm . when tubby completed the dub , which also featured augustus pablo on melodica , barrett 's drums regenerated several times and created a totally new rhythm which was later tagged '' rockers '' . this seminal track later also appeared on pablo 's 1976 album king tubby meets rockers uptown . by the later part of the 1970s , king tubby had mostly retired from music , still occasionally mixing dubs and tutoring a new generation of artists , including king jammy and perhaps his greatest protege , hopeton brown a.k.a . scientist . in the 1980s . he built a new , larger studio in the waterhouse neighbourhood of kingston with increased capabilities , and focused on the management of his labels firehouse , waterhouse , kingston 11 , and taurus , which released his productions of anthony red rose , sugar minott , conroy smith , king everald and other popular musicians . . death . king tubby was shot and killed on 6 february 1989 , outside his home in duhaney park , kingston , upon returning from a session at his waterhouse studio . . discography . with augustus pablo . ital dub ( 1974 , starapple/trojan records ) king tubbys meets rockers uptown ( 1976 , yard music/clocktower records ) original rockers ( 1979 , rockers international/greensleeves records/shanachie records ) rockers meets king tubby in a firehouse ( 1980 , yard music/shanachie ) . with the aggrovators . shalom dub ( 1975 , klik ) dubbing in the backyard ( 1982 , black music ) . with prince jammy . his majestys dub ( 1983 , sky juice ) . with prince jammy and scientist . first , second and third generation of dub ( 1981 , kg imperial ) . with lee '' scratch '' perry . upsetters 14 dub blackboard jungle ( a.k.a . blackboard jungle dub ) ( 1973 , upsetter records ) king tubby meets the upsetter at the grass roots of dub ( 1974 , fay music/total sounds ) . with bunny lee . dub from the roots ( total sounds , 1974 , total sounds ) creation of dub ( 1975 , total sounds ) the roots of dub ( a.k.a . presents the roots of dub ) ( 1975 , grounation/total sounds ) . other collaborations . niney the observer – dubbing with the observer ( 1975 , observer/total sounds ) harry mudie – in dub conference volumes one , two & three ( 1975 , 1977 & 1978 moodisc records ) larry marshall – marshall ( 1975 , marshall/java record ) yabby you – king tubby 's prophecy of dub ( a.k.a . prophecy of dub ) ( 1976 , prophets ) roots radics – dangerous dub ( 1981 , copasetic ) waterhouse posse – king tubby the dubmaster with the waterhouse posse ( 1983 , vista sounds ) sly & robbie – sly and robbie meet king tubby ( 1984 , culture press ) . compilations . king tubby & the aggrovators – dub jackpot ( 1990 , attack ) king tubby & friends – dub gone crazy - the evolution of dub at king tubby 's 1975-1979 ( 1994 , blood & fire ) king tubby & the aggrovators & bunny lee – bionic dub ( 1995 , lagoon ) king tubby & the aggrovators & bunny lee – straight to i roy head 1973–1977 ( 1995 , lagoon ) king tubby & scientist – at dub station ( 1996 , burning sounds ) king tubby & scientist – in a world of dub ( 1996 , burning sounds ) king tubby & glen brown – termination dub ( 1973-79 ) ( 1996 , blood & fire ) king tubby & friends - crucial dub ( 2000 , delta ) king tubby & the aggrovators – foundation of dub ( 2001 , trojan ) king tubby – dub fever ( 2002 , music digital ) african brothers meet king tubby – in dub ( 2005 , nature sounds ) king tubby - hometown hi-fi ( dubplate specials 1975-1979 ) ( 2013 , jamaican recordings ) . references . external links . discography at roots archives discography of 1970 's recordings & dub sources at x ray music discography at discogs