God Bless America

history . irving berlin wrote the song in 1918 while serving in the u.s . army at camp upton in yaphank , new york , but decided that it did not fit in a revue called yip yip yaphank , so he set it aside . collins , ace . songs sung , red , white , and blue : the stories behind america 's best-loved patriotic songs . harperresource , 2003 , p . 82-83 . the lyrics at that time included the line '' make her victorious on land and foam , god bless america . '' as well as '' stand beside her and guide her to the right with the light from above '' . '' from peace to patriotism : the shifting identity of 'god bless america ' '' . interview of sheryl kaskowitz by robert siegel . npr . september 2 , 2013 . retrieved september 10 , 2013 . music critic jody rosen says that a 1906 jewish dialect novelty song , '' when mose with his nose leads the band , '' contains a six-note fragment that is '' instantly recognizable as the opening strains of 'god bless america ' '' . he interprets this as an example of berlin 's '' habit of interpolating bits of half-remembered songs into his own numbers . '' berlin , born israel baline , had himself written several jewish-themed novelty tunes . in 1938 , with the rise of adolf hitler , irving berlin , who was jewish and had arrived in the u.s . from russia at the age of five , felt it was time to revive it as a '' peace song '' , and it was introduced on an armistice day broadcast in 1938 , sung by kate smith on her radio show . '' flyers history - kate smith '' flyershistory.com . accessed in 2007 . berlin had made some minor changes ; by this time , '' to the right '' might have been considered a call to the political right , so he substituted '' through the night '' instead . he also provided an introduction that is now rarely heard but which smith always used : '' while the storm clouds gather far across the sea / let us swear allegiance to a land that 's free / let us all be grateful for a land so fair , / as we raise our voices in a solemn prayer . '' ( in her first broadcast of the song , kate smith sang '' that we 're far from there '' rather than '' for a land so fair '' . ) this was changed when berlin published the sheet music in march 1939 . woody guthrie criticized the song , and in 1940 he wrote '' this land is your land , '' originally titled '' god blessed america for me , '' as a response . antisemitism groups such as the ku klux klan also protested against the song due to its authorship by a jewish immigrant . in 1943 , smith 's rendition was featured in the patriotic musical this is the army along with other berlin songs . the manuscripts in the library of congress reveal the evolution of the song from victory to peace . berlin gave the royalties of the song to the god bless america fund for redistribution to boy scouts and girl scouts in new york city . smith performed the song on her two nbc television series in the 1950s . '' god bless america '' also spawned another of irving berlin 's tunes , '' heaven watch the philippines , '' during the end of world war ii after he heard the filipinos sing a slightly revised version of the song replacing '' america '' with '' the philippines . '' the song was used early in the civil rights movement as well as at labor rallies . during the 1960s , the song was increasingly used by christian conservatives in the us to signal their opposition to secular liberalism and to silence dissenters who were speaking in favor of communism or in opposition to the u.s . involvement in the vietnam war . later , from december 11 , 1969 , through the early 1970s , the playing of smith singing the song before many home games of the national hockey league 's philadelphia flyers brought it renewed popularity as well as a reputation for being a '' good luck charm '' to the flyers long before it became a staple of nationwide sporting events . the flyers even brought smith in to perform live before game 6 of the 1974 stanley cup finals on may 19 , 1974 , and the flyers won the cup that day . . lyrics . god bless america , land that i love stand beside her and guide her through the night with the light from above from the mountains to the prairies to the oceans white with foam god bless america , my home sweet home god bless america , land that i love stand beside her and guide her through the night with the light from above from the mountains to the prairies to the oceans white with foam god bless america , my home sweet home from the mountains to the prairies to the oceans white with foam god bless america , my home sweet home god bless america , my home sweet home . notable public performances . image : pentagon memorial dedication 2008 crowd.jpg thumb singing '' god bless america '' at the pentagon memorial dedication , september 11 , 2008 in 1940 '' god bless america '' was the official campaign song for both president franklin delano roosevelt and his republican opponent , wendell willkie . at that time , the song represented cultural and religious tolerance . during a live television broadcast on the evening of the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , following addresses by then house and senate leaders , speaker dennis hastert ( republican ) and tom daschle ( democrat ) , members of the united states congress broke out into an apparently spontaneous verse of '' god bless america '' on the steps of the capitol building in washington , d.c . on july 21 , 2011 , smith 's version of the song was played as nasa 's final wakeup call for space shuttle atlantis ( sts-135 ) , capping the 30-year space shuttle program . sports events . . national hockey league . '' god bless america '' has been performed at home games of the national hockey league 's philadelphia flyers and those of the ottawa senators in which the visiting team is from the united states . ( the nhl requires arenas in both the u.s . and canada to perform both '' the star-spangled banner '' and '' o canada , '' the canadian national anthem , at games that involve teams from both countries . ) at some flyers ' home games , especially during big games and the playoffs , their main anthem singer , lauren hart , has sung '' god bless america '' alternating lyrics with kate smith on a video screen , until 2019 . smith actually appeared in person to sing at select flyers games , including their 1974 stanley cup clinching game against the boston bruins , to which she received a thunderous ovation from the passionate philadelphia fans . before games whenever '' god bless america '' is performed until 2019 , lou nolan , the pa announcer for the flyers at the wells fargo center , would say : '' ladies and gentlemen , at this time , we ask that you please rise and remove your hats and salute to our flags and welcome the no . 1 ranked anthemist in the nhl , our very own lauren hart , as she sings ( if the visiting team is from canada , o canada , followed by ) god bless america , accompanied by the great kate smith . '' at some senators home games since , if the visiting team is from the u.s . , their main anthem singer , ontario provincial police constable lyndon slewidge , has sung '' god bless america '' and '' o canada . '' an example of this came during the senators ' home opener during the 2002–03 season , when they were home against the new jersey devils . during tom golisano 's time as owner of the buffalo sabres , the team occasionally substituted '' god bless america '' for '' the star-spangled banner '' during certain special events . when this occurred , ronan tynan was brought in to sing the song while usual anthem singer doug allen sang '' o canada . '' . major league baseball . at chicago 's wrigley field during the vietnam war , the song was often played by the organist as part of his postgame playlist while fans filed out of the stadium . since the september 11 attacks , '' god bless america '' is commonly sung during the seventh-inning stretch in major league baseball games , most often on sundays , opening day , memorial day , independence day , all-star game , labor day , september 11 , and all post-season major league baseball games . following the attacks , john dever , then the assistant media relations director of the san diego padres , suggested the song replace '' take me out to the ball game '' , the more traditional 7th inning anthem . major league baseball quickly followed the padres lead and instituted it league-wide for the rest of the season . presently , teams decide individually when to play the song . the new york yankees , at yankee stadium home games , is currently the only major league club to play '' god bless america '' at every game during the seventh-inning stretch . the yankees ' yes network televises its performance during all games before going to a commercial . during major games , such as opening day , national holidays , playoff contests , or games against the boston red sox or new york mets , the yankees will often have irish tenor ronan tynan perform the song . on august 26 , 2008 , at a boston red sox game at yankee stadium , a fan who had attempted to leave for the restroom during the playing of the song was restrained and subsequently sent out of the building by nypd officers . part of the resolution of the resulting lawsuit was that the new york yankees announced that they would no longer restrict the movement of fans during the playing of the song . on september 15 , 2009 , three high school teens filed a lawsuit against new jersey 's minor league newark bears for being ejected from eagles riverfront stadium over their refusal to stand during the playing of '' god bless america '' on june 29 , 2009 . before being ejected , they were asked to leave the stadium by bears president and co-owner thomas cetnar . . american football . at the january 1 , 1976 , rose bowl , to honor the start of the united states bicentennial , kate smith and the ucla band performed '' god bless america '' for a national television audience . during the super bowl li halftime show a pre-recorded introduction by lady gaga , who headlined the show , featured both '' god bless america '' and '' this land is your land '' . indianapolis 500 . the indianapolis 500 is traditionally held at the end of may , and '' god bless america '' has been sung there since 2003 . the song '' america the beautiful '' was sung before , but it was switched to '' god bless america '' in the post-9/11 era . the song for many years was performed by florence henderson , a native hoosier , and a friend of the hulman-george family , the track 's owners at the time . the performance , often not televised , immediately precedes the national anthem . henderson routinely sang the entire song , including the prologue , and in some years sang the chorus a second time . celine dion version .