GHZ experiment

summary description and example . a ghz experiment is performed using a quantum system in a greenberger–horne–zeilinger state . an example a . zeilinger , dance of the photons , farrar , straus and giroux , new york , 2010 , pp . 218–223 . of a ghz state is three photons in an entangled state , with the photons being in a superposition of being all horizontally polarized ( hhh ) or all vertically polarized ( vvv ) , with respect to some coordinate system . prior to any measurements being made , the polarizations of the photons are indeterminate ; if a measurement is made on one of the photons using a two-channel polarizer aligned with the axes of the coordinate system , the photon assumes either horizontal or vertical polarization , with 50 % probability for each orientation , and the other two photons immediately assume the identical polarization . in a ghz experiment regarding photon polarization , however , a set of measurements is performed on the three entangled photons using two-channel polarizers set to various orientations relative to the coordinate system . for specific combinations of orientations , perfect ( rather than statistical ) correlations between the three polarizations are predicted by both local hidden variable theory ( aka '' local realism '' ) and by quantum mechanical theory , and the predictions may be contradictory . for instance , if the polarization of two of the photons are measured and determined to be rotated +45° from horizontal , then local hidden variable theory predicts that the polarization of the third photon will also be +45° from horizontal . however , quantum mechanical theory predicts that it will be +45° from vertical . the results of actual experiments agree with the predictions of quantum mechanics , not those of local realism . . detailed technical example . preliminary considerations . frequently considered cases of ghz experiments are concerned with observations obtained by three measurements , a , b , and c , each of which detects one signal at a time in one of two distinct mutually exclusive outcomes ( called channels ) : for instance a detecting and counting a signal either as ( a↑ ) or as ( a↓ ) , b detecting and counting a signal either as ( b « ) or as ( b » ) , and c detecting and counting a signal either as ( c ◊ ) or as ( c ♦ ) . signals are to be considered and counted only if a , b , and c detect them trial-by-trial together ; i.e . for any one signal which has been detected by a in one particular trial , b must have detected precisely one signal in the same trial , and c must have detected precisely one signal in the same trial ; and vice versa . for any one particular trial it may be consequently distinguished and counted whether a detected a signal as ( a↑ ) and not as ( a↓ ) , with corresponding counts n t ( a↑ ) 1 and n t ( a↓ ) 0 , in this particular trial t , or a detected a signal as ( a↓ ) and not as ( a↑ ) , with corresponding counts n f ( a↑ ) 0 and n f ( a↓ ) 1 , in this particular trial f , where trials f and t are evidently distinct ; similarly , it can be distinguished and counted whether b detected a signal as ( b « ) and not as ( b » ) , with corresponding counts n g ( b « ) 1 and n g ( b » ) 0 , in this particular trial g , or b detected a signal as ( b » ) and not as ( b « ) , with corresponding counts n h ( b « ) 0 and n h ( b » ) 1 , in this particular trial h , where trials g and h are evidently distinct ; and correspondingly , it can be distinguished and counted whether c detected a signal as ( c ◊ ) and not as ( c ♦ ) , with corresponding counts n l ( c ◊ ) 1 and n l ( c ♦ ) 0 , in this particular trial l , or c detected a signal as ( c ♦ ) and not as ( c ◊ ) , with corresponding counts n m ( c ◊ ) 0 and n m ( c ♦ ) 1 , in this particular trial m , where trials l and m are evidently distinct . for any one trial j it may be consequently distinguished in which particular channels signals were detected and counted by a , b , and c together , in this particular trial j ; and correlation numbers such as : p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( j ) ( n j ( a↑ ) − n j ( a↓ ) ) ( n j ( b « ) − n j ( b » ) ) ( n j ( c ◊ ) − n j ( c ♦ ) ) can be evaluated in each trial . following an argument by john stewart bell , each trial is now characterized by particular individual adjustable apparatus parameters , or settings of the observers involved . there are ( at least ) two distinguishable settings being considered for each , namely a 's settings a 1 , and a 2 , b 's settings b 1 , and b 2 , and c 's settings c 1 , and c 2 . trial s for instance would be characterized by a 's setting a 2 , b 's setting b 2 , and c 's settings c 2 ; another trial , r , would be characterized by a 's setting a 2 , b 's setting b 2 , and c 's settings c 1 , and so on . ( since c 's settings are distinct between trials r and s , therefore these two trials are distinct . ) correspondingly , the correlation number p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( s ) is written as p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( a 2 , b 2 , c 2 ) , the correlation number p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( r ) is written as p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( a 2 , b 2 , c 1 ) and so on . further , as ghz and collaborators demonstrate in detail , the following four distinct trials , with their various separate detector counts and with suitably identified settings , may be considered and be found experimentally : trial s as shown above , characterized by the settings a 2 , b 2 , and c 2 , and with detector counts such that : p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( s ) ( n s ( a↑ ) − n s ( a↓ ) ) ( n s ( b « ) − n s ( b » ) ) ( n s ( c ◊ ) − n s ( c ♦ ) ) −1 , trial u with settings a 2 , b 1 , and c 1 , and with detector counts such that : p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( u ) ( n u ( a↑ ) − n u ( a↓ ) ) ( n u ( b « ) − n u ( b » ) ) ( n u ( c ◊ ) − n u ( c ♦ ) ) 1 , trial v with settings a 1 , b 2 , and c 1 , and with detector counts such that : p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( v ) ( n v ( a↑ ) − n v ( a↓ ) ) ( n v ( b « ) − n v ( b » ) ) ( n v ( c ◊ ) − n v ( c ♦ ) ) 1 , and trial w with settings a 1 , b 1 , and c 2 , and with detector counts such that : p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( w ) ( n w ( a↑ ) − n w ( a↓ ) ) ( n w ( b « ) − n w ( b » ) ) ( n w ( c ◊ ) − n w ( c ♦ ) ) 1 . the notion of local hidden variables is now introduced by considering the following question : can the individual detection outcomes and corresponding counts as obtained by any one observer , e.g . the numbers ( n j ( a↑ ) − n j ( a↓ ) ) , be expressed as a function a ( a x , λ ) ( which necessarily assumes the values +1 or −1 ) , i.e . as a function only of the setting of this observer in this trial , and of one other hidden parameter λ , but without an explicit dependence on settings or outcomes concerning the other observers ( who are considered far away ) ? therefore : can the correlation numbers such as p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( a x , b x , c x ) , be expressed as a product of such independent functions , a ( a x , λ ) , b ( b x , λ ) and c ( c x , λ ) , for all trials and all settings , with a suitable hidden variable value λ ? comparison with the product which defined p ( a↑ ) ( b « ) ( c ◊ ) ( j ) explicitly above , readily suggests to identify λ → j , a ( a x , j ) → ( n j ( a↑ ) − n j ( a↓ ) ) , b ( b x , j ) → ( n j ( b « ) − n j ( b » ) ) , and c ( c x , j ) → ( n j ( c ◊ ) − n j ( c ♦ ) ) , where j denotes any one trial which is characterized by the specific settings a x , b x , and c x , of a , b , and of c , respectively . however , ghz and collaborators also require that the hidden variable argument to functions a ( ) , b ( ) , and c ( ) may take the same value , λ , even in distinct trials , being characterized by distinct experimental contexts . this is the statistical independence assumption ( also assumed in bell 's theorem and commonly known as '' free will '' assumption ) . consequently , substituting these functions into the consistent conditions on four distinct trials , u , v , w , and s shown above , they are able to obtain the following four equations concerning one and the same value λ : a ( a 2 , λ ) b ( b 2 , λ ) c ( c 2 , λ ) −1 , a ( a 2 , λ ) b ( b 1 , λ ) c ( c 1 , λ ) 1 , a ( a 1 , λ ) b ( b 2 , λ ) c ( c 1 , λ ) 1 , and a ( a 1 , λ ) b ( b 1 , λ ) c ( c 2 , λ ) 1 . taking the product of the last three equations , and noting that a ( a 1 , λ ) a ( a 1 , λ ) 1 , b ( b 1 , λ ) b ( b 1 , λ ) 1 , and c ( c 1 , λ ) c ( c 1 , λ ) 1 , yields : a ( a 2 , λ ) b ( b 2 , λ ) c ( c 2 , λ ) 1 in contradiction to the first equation ; 1 ≠ −1 . given that the four trials under consideration can indeed be consistently considered and experimentally realized , the assumptions concerning hidden variables which lead to the indicated mathematical contradiction are therefore collectively unsuitable to represent all experimental results ; namely the assumption of local hidden variables which occur equally in distinct trials . deriving an inequality . since equations ( 1 ) through ( 4 ) above can not be satisfied simultaneously when the hidden variable , λ , takes the same value in each equation , ghsz proceed by allowing λ to take different values in each equation . they define λ 1 : the set of all λs such that equation ( 1 ) holds , λ 2 : the set of all λs such that equation ( 2 ) holds , λ 3 : the set of all λs such that equation ( 3 ) holds , λ 4 : the set of all λs such that equation ( 4 ) holds . also , λ i c is the complement of λ i . now , equation ( 1 ) can only be true if at least one of the other three is false . therefore , : λ 1 ⊆ λ 2 c ∪ λ 3 c ∪ λ 4 c . in terms of probability , : p ( λ 1 ) ≤ p ( λ 2 c ∪ λ 3 c ∪ λ 4 c ) . by the rules of probability theory , it follows that : p ( λ 1 ) ≤ p ( λ 2 c ) + p ( λ 3 c ) + p ( λ 4 c ) . this inequality allows for an experimental test . testing the inequality . to test the inequality just derived , ghsz need to make one more assumption , the '' fair sampling '' assumption . because of inefficiencies in real detectors , in some trials of the experiment only one or two particles of the triple will be detected . fair sampling assumes that these inefficiencies are unrelated to the hidden variables ; in other words , the number of triples actually detected in any run of the experiment is proportional to the number that would have been detected if the apparatus had no inefficiencies - with the same constant of proportionality for all possible settings of the apparatus . with this assumption , p ( λ 1 ) can be determined by choosing the apparatus settings a 2 , b 2 , and c 2 , counting the number of triples for which the outcome is -1 , and dividing by the total number of triples observed at that setting . the other probabilities can be determined in a similar manner , allowing a direct experimental test of the inequality . ghsz also show that the fair sampling assumption can be dispensed with if the detector efficiencies are at least 90.8 % . references .