Hal Newhouser

early life . newhouser was a schoolboy star at murray-wright high school in his hometown of detroit . before he was approached by professional baseball teams , he had been saving money to attend a trade school by working several jobs . the young newhouser sold newspapers , collected pop bottles and worked in a bowling alley before signing on in professional baseball . he was signed by the detroit tigers in at the age of 18 . a tigers scout offered a 500 signing bonus to newhouser , who found the sum of money to be unimaginable . ten minutes after he signed , someone arrived from the cleveland indians ; that employee had been prepared to offer 15,000 to his parents in addition to a 4,000 car . . playing career . early career . newhouser made his debut for detroit on september 29 , 1939 . in , he earned a spot on the tigers out of spring training . in his first two full big-league seasons , the young left-hander experienced control problems , walking more batters than he struck out while posting win-loss records of 9–9 and 9–11 . he improved in and , posting excellent earned run averages ( eras ) , but he still lost more than he won on a team with a weak offense . as world war ii got under way , the tigers moved up in the standings because several of their top players , including newhouser , were classified as 4-f ( ineligible to be drafted ) . newhouser was 4-f due to a leaky heart valve ; he attempted to join the service anyway but was turned down several times . he blossomed in , becoming a dominant pitcher in wartime baseball . that season , newhouser rang up a 29–9 record , leading the league in wins and strikeouts ( 187 ) . his 2.22 era was second in the league , as were his 25 complete games and six shutouts . the tigers jumped into contention , finishing second in the american league , with newhouser named mvp . newhouser won the first sporting news pitcher of the year award in 1944 . pitcher of the year by the season , newhouser had been selected for three consecutive al all-star teams . the 1945 all-star game was cancelled on april 24 because of travel restrictions and seven out of eight scheduled interleague games were played in place of the all-star game on july 9 and 10 to support the american red cross and war relief fund . baseball did you know ? – vii , 1945 all star game replacements retrieved july 28 , 2015 baseball almanac retrieved july 8 , 2015 newhouser became the first pitcher to repeat as mvp that season and helped the team win the world series . he won the pitcher 's triple crown , leading the al in wins ( 25 , against nine losses ) , era ( 1.81 ) and strikeouts ( 212 ) ; he also led the league in innings pitched , games started , complete games and shutouts . newhouser pitched four innings of relief on the season 's final day as detroit rallied for the pennant . newhouser won the second sporting news pitcher of the year award . he became the youngest player ( 24 ) to win the award in two consecutive years . in that year 's world series , newhouser won two games , including a complete-game victory in the deciding seventh game . . later career . in , he went 26–9 with a 1.94 era , again leading the league in wins and era . his 275 strikeouts was second in the league . newhouser was runner-up in the mvp race to ted williams . newhouser continued to rate among the game 's best pitchers for the next five years . he won 17 games in , led the al with 21 wins in and rang up an 18–11 mark in . after a 15–13 season in , he hurt his arm and his workload was cut significantly . after being released by the tigers following the season , newhouser signed on with the cleveland indians and was their top long reliever in , when cleveland won 111 games and the pennant . in his final big-league hurrah , he posted a 7–2 mark with a 2.54 era , and got to pitch in his second world series . he ended his career with a record of 207–150 and a 3.06 era . he is the only pitcher ever to win consecutive mvp awards . as a hitter , newhouser had a . 201 career batting average ( 201-for-999 ) with 70 runs , 2 home runs , 81 rbi and 89 bases on balls . defensively , he recorded a . 971 fielding percentage covering 488 games pitched . later life . newhouser spent his first 20 years after retiring from baseball away from the sport , working as a bank vice president in pontiac , michigan . eventually , he served as a scout for the baltimore orioles , cleveland indians , detroit tigers , and houston astros . as a scout with the orioles , newhouser discovered milt pappas , a detroit high schooler who went on to win 209 games in an all-star career – two more than newhouser did . he also signed future cy young award winner dean chance , who later earned the trophy with the los angeles angels in 1964 . while with the astros , newhouser was credited with discovering derek jeter , whom the astros passed over for phil nevin . he quit his job with the astros after they ignored his advice to draft jeter , though he had planned to retire after that season in any case . in , he was elected to the national baseball hall of fame . his induction class included tom seaver , rollie fingers and bill mcgowan . the ceremony was attended by a then-record-setting crowd of 20,000 people . the tigers retired newhouser 's number 16 in . he died on november 10 , 1998 , in a hospital in southfield , michigan . he had been ill with emphysema and heart problems . . personal life . during his playing days , newhouser 's teammates nicknamed him '' prince hal '' because of the way he carried himself . his wife , beryl newhouser , said that she could not ever remember seeing him with his shirttail untucked . see also . list of major league baseball career wins leaders major league baseball triple crown list of major league baseball annual strikeout leaders list of major league baseball annual wins leaders major league baseball titles leaders best pitching seasons by a detroit tiger sporting news pitcher of the year award sporting news player of the year award . notes . references . external links . hal newhouser oral history interview ( 1 of 2 ) - national baseball hall of fame digital collection hal newhouser oral history interview ( 2 of 2 ) - national baseball hall of fame digital collection :