Cleveland Spiders

history . the spiders were the third professional baseball franchise based in cleveland . the first team , forest city , which played from 1870 through 1872 , was initially an independent team before joining the national association of professional base ball players for two seasons before disbanding . they were followed in 1879 by the city 's first national league team , the cleveland blues , who folded after the 1884 season . fleitz , p . 22 . '' brunell suggested , jokingly , that such a gangly , long-limbed collection of ballplayers in their black and gray uniforms should be called spiders . and so they were . brunell first used the name spiders in his plain dealer column on may 12 . '' . 1887–1888 . after the 1886 season , the pittsburgh alleghenys left the american association ( aa ) to join the national league . the aa , then considered a major league , chose the cleveland group headed by frank robison as an expansion team to begin play in 1887 over proposals from kansas city and detroit . later , robison 's brother stanley was added to the ownership group . initially , the team was known as the forest citys , drawing on the city 's nickname and the nickname that had been used on the city 's two previous professional baseball teams . the nickname blues was also used again in reference to the team uniforms . the forest citys were a weak team in their early years . 1889–1898 . in , they moved to the national league and became known as the spiders , reportedly after comments from a team executive assessing the players . light , p . 205 . '' . a club executive assessing their shapes supposedly said : 'they look skinny and spindly , just like spiders . might as well call them spiders and be done with it . ' & nbsp ; '' frank h . brunell , this team executive who also doubled as sportswriter for the plain dealer , noted the combination of the team 's new black-and-gray uniforms together with the sight of several skinny , long-limbed players . he joked the team should be called '' spiders '' , and the name stuck . the team started to improve in , largely due to the signing of future baseball hall of fame pitcher cy young . the spiders had their first taste of success in 1892 when they finished 93–56 overall ; winning the second half by three games over boston with a 53–23 record . other than standout second baseman cupid childs , the spiders had an unremarkable offense . their success in 1892 was built on pitching strength ; cy young was the nl 's most dominant hurler , and 22-year-old nig cuppy had an outstanding rookie year . following the season , a '' world 's championship series '' exhibition was played between cleveland and the first-half winner boston beaneaters , but the spiders could only muster one tie in six games . in 1895 , the spiders again finished second , this time to the equally rough-and-tumble baltimore orioles . young again led the league in wins , and speedy left fielder jesse burkett won the batting title with a . 409 average . the spiders won the temple cup , an 1890s postseason series between the first- and second-place teams in the nl . amid fan rowdyism and garbage-throwing , the spiders won four of five games against baltimore , including two wins for cy young . the 1895 championship was the high-water mark for the franchise . the following season , baltimore and cleveland again finished first and second in the nl , but in the battle for the 1896 temple cup , the second-place spiders were swept in four games . in 1897 , despite a winning record , the franchise finished fifth , a season highlighted by young throwing the first of three career no-hitters on september 18 . the spiders again finished fifth in 1898 . 1899 season . in 1899 , the spiders ' owners , the robison brothers , bought the st . louis browns out of bankruptcy and changed their name to the perfectos . however , they kept the spiders as well—a blatant conflict of interest . believing the perfectos would draw greater attendance in more densely populated st . louis , the robisons transferred most of the cleveland stars , including future baseball hall of famers cy young , jesse burkett , and bobby wallace , to st . louis . they also shifted a large number of cleveland home games to the road ( for instance , the original opening day game was shifted to st . louis ) . with a decimated roster , the spiders made a wretched showing . they finished with a dismal won-lost record of 20–134 ( . 130 ) , the worst in mlb history , 84 games behind the pennant-winning brooklyn superbas and 35 games behind the next-to-last ( 11th ) place washington senators . their batting records were the worst in the league in runs , hits , doubles , triples , home runs , walks , stolen bases , on-base percentage , and slugging percentage . the robisons announced after buying the perfectos that they intended to run the spiders as a '' sideshow '' , and cleveland fans apparently took them at their word . the spiders ' first 16 home games drew a total of 3,179 fans , or an average of 199 fans per game . due to these meager attendance figures , the other 11 nl teams refused to come to league park , as their cut of the revenue from ticket sales did not even begin to cover their hotel and travel expenses . the spiders were thus forced to play 85 of their remaining 93 games on the road . counting the large number of home games that had been shifted to the road earlier in the season , they only played 42 home games during the season , including only eight after july 1 , and finished 9–33 ( . 214 ) at home and 11–101 ( . 098 ) on the road . only 6,088 fans paid to attend spiders home games in 1899 , for a pitiful average of a mere 145 spectators per game in 9,000-seat league park . the 101 road losses is a major-league record that will never be threatened , as current scheduling practices have teams play a maximum of 81 away games ( excluding one- or three-game playoffs ) . the team 's longest winning streak of the season was two games , which they accomplished once : on may 20–21 . spiders opponents scored ten or more runs 49 times in 154 games . pitchers jim hughey ( 4–30 ) and charlie knepper ( 4–22 ) tied for the team lead in wins . the 1962 new york mets , 40–120 ( . 250 ) , and 2003 detroit tigers , 43–119 ( . 265 ) , own the modern records in their respective leagues for the most losses , and thus draw frequent comparisons to the 1899 spiders for futility . legacy . the robisons ' decision to effectively reduce the spiders to minor league status , along with other intra-league raiding such as that conducted by the dodgers and to a lesser extent the pittsburgh pirates , unwittingly helped pave the way to the national league 's loss of its major league monopoly . the 12th-place spiders were one of four teams contracted out of the national league at the end of the 1899 season ( the others were the 11th-place senators , the ninth-place louisville colonels and the bankrupt fourth-place baltimore orioles ) . the 1899 fiasco played a role in the major leagues passing a rule which barred one person from owning controlling interest in two clubs . the robisons sold the assets of the spiders team to charles somers and john kilfoyle in 1900 . in 1900 , the then-minor american league ( previously the western league ) fielded a team called the cleveland lake shores . in 1901 , after the american league declared major league status , the team was called the cleveland blues , and eventually the cleveland indians . for years the cleveland indians have claimed spiders outfielder louis sockalexis as the inspiration for the team 's name , which dates to 1915 . sockalexis played three seasons for the cleveland spiders , from 1897 to 1899 , and is often credited as the first native american to play professional baseball at the major league level . during his time with the spiders , the press often referred to the team as the indians or '' tebeau 's indians '' . the cleveland indians claim has been disputed , however , including in a 2012 cleveland scene essay titled '' the curse of chief wahoo '' , which argues the indians organization has cited sockalexis in part to justify continued use of the controversial team name . . baseball hall of famers . see also . cleveland spiders all-time roster list of cleveland spiders managers list of cleveland spiders opening day starting pitchers . references . ; books . external links . baseball-reference.com : cleveland spiders statistics encyclopedia of cleveland history : cleveland spiders