Mainau

geography . position . the island averages out at a height between 395 ( roughly equals the lake ’ s average medium water-level ) and 425 meters above sea level . its highest peak is located at the großherzog-friedrich terrace ( historic water reservoir ) . mainau island is 610-meters long from north to south and a 1050 meters wide from west to east . the island ’ s circumference is about three kilometers . the shortest distance between the downwelling molasse slice and the lake ’ s shore is about 130 meters . population . few people inhabit mainau island . due to its small amount of inhabitants , it is considered a hamlet . meyer ’ s lexikon ’ s issue of 1888 declared that 28 people lived on mainau island . during the census of 1961 , a population of 123 was verified . count björn bernadotte is living in the castle on mainau island . parks and gardens . mainau island is a '' flowering island '' notable for its parks and gardens . frederick i , grand duke of baden , created the island 's arboretum , which now contains 500 species of deciduous and coniferous trees , many exotic and valuable , including fine specimens of sequoiadendron giganteum ( 1864 ) and metasequoia glyptostroboides ( 1952 ) . the island also contains about 200 rhododendron and azalea varieties . due to the advantageous climate at the lake , palm trees and other mediterranean plants can grow on the drop-shaped island . because of its rich subtropical and partly even tropical vegetation , mainau island is also called '' flowering island in the lake constance '' . count lennart bernadotte , who died in 2004 , liked to call his island '' blumenschiff '' ( engl . flower ship ) . he also described the famous destination as follows : '' she is a coquettish little lady , mainau island , who constantly demands much attention , even more love and ceaselessly new clothes . '' - lennart bernadotte . by '' new clothes '' , he probably meant the blossoms , plants and flower-beds which are constantly renewed by the gardeners . apart from the historic buildings , the centerpiece of mainau island is the arboretum with its 500 different types of rare and valuable broad-leaved trees and conifers , which was created in 1856 by grand duke friedrich i . among those is one of germany 's '' oldest '' dawn redwood trees ( metasequoia glyptostroboides ) . the tree , which originated from china , was planted on the island in 1952 , when it was just 70 centimeters tall . particularly mighty are some exemplars of the giant redwood ( sequoiadendron giganteum ) . their seeds came from california in 1853 and were planted on the island in 1864 , which makes them one of the oldest of their kind in europe . you can find the above-mentioned giant redwoods as well as cedars , dawn redwoods and tulip poplars on the island . the arboretum expands towards the north-west of the island . spring marks the beginning of the '' blumenjahr '' ( eng . flower year ) with an exhibition of orchids . from march to may you can see several types of flowers in full bloom , like tulips , daffodils , primroses , forget-me-nots and hyacinths . to show the full beauty of all these flowers the so-called „ frühlingsallee “ ( eng . spring alley ) was opened , which is a path across the island surrounded by beds of these plants . from may to june over 200 kinds of rhododendrons and azaleas are in full bloom . to the west of the '' comturey-keller '' you can find an italian rose garden commissioned by friedrich i . this rose garden is strictly geometric and consists of pergolas , sculptures and fountains . in general , over 1200 kinds of roses can be found on the island . „ frühlingsallee “ leads to „ mediterran-terrassen “ ( eng . mediterranean terrace ) where exotic plants such as palm families , agaves , cacti and bougainvillea are presented in pails during summer . lake constance and its surroundings as well as the alps can be seen in a panoramic view from here . in july the blossoms of brugmansia and hibiscus are blooming on mainau island and in august the blossoms of passion flowers bloom . on the southern end you can find “ südgarten ” ( eng . south garden ) where in autumn fields of dahlia with approximately 20,000 dahlia bushes and 250 varieties gleam from september until october . spring and summer flowers such as different kinds of fuchsia are growing on the affiliated shore garden to the eastern side of “ südgarten ” . the “ bodenseerelief ” ( eng . relief of lake constance ) is a very popular photo motive . it is a relief with the picture of a flower which is changed by season . a small harbor with a landing place is situated to the northern side of mainau island . excursion boats lay in here and another entrance to “ frühlingsallee ” can be found here . schmetterlingshaus . the '' schmetterlingshaus '' ( eng . butterfly house ) on mainau island is open all year round . with roughly 1,000 square meters it is the second biggest of its kind in germany . the temperature is 26 degrees celsius and with a humidity of 80 to 90 percent visitors can walk through a tropical surrounding with swooshing waterfalls and exotic plants and flowers . depending on the season , roughly 700 to 1,000 colorful butterflies of 80 different kinds , mainly of southern american origin , are flying among visitors in the tropical landscape . approximately one third of these butterflies reproduce in a natural way . but the amount of progeny is extremely varying . therefore , every week the butterfly house gets 400 butterfly cocoons delivered from costa rican , english and dutch breeders . a budget of approximately 20,000 euros is provided each year for new butterfly caterpillars . the gardens surrounding the butterfly house serve as habitat for the native species . affiliated to the butterfly house is a scent garden with more than 150 species of scented plants . wasserwelt . a playground called wasserwelt ( eng . water world ) was especially built for kids and it expands over an area of 1,100 square meters . wasserwelt is a pool which is 60 centimetres deep and bordered by 130 tonnes of boulders . the pool is filled with 170 cubic metres of water and has an island at its centre . the children can float around or cross the lake with rafts or a wooden ferry . the lake is surrounded by little wooden houses which serve as climbing scaffolds and as a reminder of the pile dwellings . the houses are connected through suspension bridges and studs . in addition , there are water channels and mud tables . matthias wagner and markus zeiler , the two designers of mainau island , prepared for the case of a child having dived to deeply into the water world : they placed a tumbler inside a kiosk at the playground , so that parents can easily dry wet clothing . the playground , like all other playgrounds , is inspected and approved by tüv süd on a regular basis . buildings . deutschordenschloss . the “ deutschordenschloss “ was built upon the stables of the old castle , which had been destroyed in the 18th century . it was built after the drafts and under the construction management of giovanni gaspare bagnato . the construction started in 1739 and took 7 years . the three-winged baroque palace was built around the main courtyard with a terraced garden at its side . at the central risalit of the western part is a big crest of the grand master clemens august of bavaria , the provincial commander philipp von froberg , and of the mainaukomptur friedrich of baden . the crest of the “ deutschorden ” ( eng . teutonic order ) was affixed to the east wing ( seaside ) . the castle still serves as the residence of the comital family . depending on whether the comital family is present or not , the comital flag is hoisted on the castle ’ s roof . the private rooms are in the northern wing in the non-accessible part of the castle , which is on the lefthand side of the castle ‘ s courtyard . the centerpiece is the former audience hall . the so-called “ weißer saal ” ( eng . white hall ) is kept in the colors white and gold and has since its construction in 1883 not been changed . it is only open to the public for special events or concerts . the central section of the castle is used for temporary exhibitions . there is a café in the southern wing with right below the tall palm trees of the castle ‘ s patio . although the building licence for the palm house , a building made up of complex glass structure , originally only covered the few months of winter , it now protects its trees all year round . more than 20 different kinds of palm trees grow here , including a canarian date-tree ( phoenix canariensis ) , planted in 1888 , which is more than 15 meters high . schlosskirche . many call the newly constructed palace chapel the debut work of bagnatos ' countless church buildings . its construction on the southeast end of the island lasted from 1732 to 1739 . the rectangular aisleless church is 20 meters long and 9,5 meters wide and has a hemispheric chancel . while raised rectangular panels are organised around the outer front , the lateral walls are decorated with arched windows . a gable is situated above the western wall , just below the tower buildup with a curved roof . the inside of the chapel is divided into two parts : a rectangular aisle containing the semicircular choir and the organ loft right across from the altar . not just several altars but also a pulpit and multiple sculptures by joseph anton feuchtmayer ( 1696 - 1770 ) can be found here . in 1737/1738 franz joseph spiegler ( 1691 - 1757 ) added an additional high altar painting as well as ceiling frescoes , now framed by francesco pozzi 's ( 1704 - 1789 ) long garnish stucco . johann baptist babel ( 1716 - 1799 ) later added a black madonna to the picture . both side altars display very dynamic angel figures . the left is crowned with a figurine of the martyr sebastian and the right altar shows st . nepomuk . the altarpiece of the high altar depicts maria with child , the holy family and john the baptist . the ceiling fresco also portrays the life of mary . the original organ , manufactured by master craftsman johann michael bieher ( 1687/88 to 1763 ) from constance and decorated by feuchtmayer , was sold and around 1860 and replaced by a new organ in late classicistic style . bagnatos ' grave is situated in the crypt . the castle church is known to be the point of beginning of the oberswabian high baroque und is used as a wedding chapel . gärtnerturm . the so-called “ gärtnertum ” is situated on the western side , opposite the baroque castle and churchensemble . the walls , which were part of the medieval fortifications , contrast the festive frontage of the castle . in earlier days , a vault used for stockpiling and as a wine press house had been constructed deep inside the rocks . the comturey restaurant , reconstructed and expanded in 2013/2014 , offers dining with a view across the lake . history . until the napoleonic mediatisations and secularisations of small german fiefs this island belonged to the order of teutonic knights . it was later sold into private ownership . in 1853 grand duke frederick i of baden purchased the island as his personal property and used the palace built by the teutonic knights as summer palace . at the end of world war i baden became a republic with the abdication of grand duke frederick ii , son of frederick i . the former grand duke retained his private property including mainau . when he died childless in 1928 the island passed to his sister victoria of baden , wife of king gustaf v of sweden . upon her death two years later she bequeathed the island to her second son prince wilhelm , duke of södermanland and his descendants . in 1932 prince wilhem gave mainau to his only child lennart bernadotte who owned it until 1974 when he transferred the island to a foundation . count bernadotte formed enterprise mainau gmbh in 1991 as a private enterprise to manage the island for the benefit of the lennart bernadotte-stiftung . the count remained active in managing mainau until his death in 2004 but had appointed his second wife sonja co-manager in 2001 . widowed , she and their children ran both the foundation and the management company until 2007 . since january 2007 bettina bernadotte , the eldest daughter of lennart and sonja , directs the mainau gmbh as current manager , and since 2011 her brother björn bernadotte has joined her . . pre- and early history . in 1862 , signs of an earlier population were discovered along the south banks of mainau and soon exploited by domain administrator walter : among the items were wedges , a potsherd , flint splinters , an axe and a muller . the pile dwelling settlement made up of six houses was uncovered in the 1930s and dated back to the neolithic age ( 3.000 b.c . ) . lake-dwelling settlements of the neolithic and the bronze age were located along the northern shore and the southwestern island along the shallow water zone . gallery . file : frühlingsallee tulpenblüte 2010 ( 1 ) . jpg file : mainau italienische wassertreppe.jpg file : mainau1.jpg file : mainau.jpg file : mainau5.jpg file : mainau6.jpg file : mainau4.jpg file : mainau10.jpg file : mainau-4.jpg file : mainau9.jpg file : badenwurttemberg mainau1 tango7174.jpg file : mainau11.jpg file : mainau12.jpg file : mainau13.jpg file : mainau14.jpg file : mainau15.jpg file : mainau16.jpg file : mainau palace 04.jpg the palace in spring 2008 . references . external links . mainau island ( official website ) information and pictures about mainau mainau : an article and pictures