Polysemy

polysemes . a polyseme is a word or phrase with different , but related senses . since the test for polysemy is the vague concept of the relatedness , judgments of polysemy can be difficult to make . because applying pre-existing words to new situations is a natural process of language change , looking at words ' etymology is helpful in determining polysemy but not the only solution ; as words become lost in etymology , what once was a useful distinction of meaning may no longer be so . some apparently unrelated words share a common historical origin , however , so etymology is not an infallible test for polysemy , and dictionary writers also often defer to speakers ' intuitions to judge polysemy in cases where it contradicts etymology . english has many polysemous words . for example , the verb '' to get '' can mean '' procure '' ( i 'll get the drinks ) , '' become '' ( she got scared ) , '' understand '' ( i get it ) etc . in linear or vertical polysemy , one sense of a word is a subset of the other . these are examples of hyponymy and hypernymy , and are sometimes called autohyponyms . for example , 'dog ' can be used for 'male dog ' . alan cruse identifies four types of linear polysemy : autohyponymy , where the basic sense leads to a specialised sense ( from '' drinking ( anything ) '' to '' drinking ( alcohol ) '' ) automeronymy , where the basic sense leads to a subpart sense ( from '' door ( whole structure ) '' to '' door ( panel ) '' ) autohyperonymy or autosuperordination , where the basic sense leads to a wider sense ( from '' ( female ) cow '' to '' cow ( of either sex ) '' ) autoholonymy , where the basic sense leads to a larger sense ( from '' leg ( thigh and calf ) '' to '' leg ( thigh , calf , knee and foot ) '' ) in non-linear polysemy , the original sense of a word is used figuratively to provide a different way of looking at the new subject . alan cruse identifies three types of non-linear polysemy : metonymy , where one sense '' stands for '' another ( from '' hands ( body part ) '' to '' hands ( manual labourers ) '' ) metaphor , where there is a resemblance between senses ( from '' swallowing ( a pill ) '' to '' swallowing ( an argument ) '' ) other construals ( for example , from '' month ( of the year ) '' to '' month ( 30 days ) '' ) there are several tests for polysemy , but one of them is zeugma : if one word seems to exhibit zeugma when applied in different contexts , it is likely that the contexts bring out different polysemes of the same word . if the two senses of the same word do not seem to fit , yet seem related , then it is likely that they are polysemous . the fact that this test again depends on speakers ' judgments about relatedness , however , means that this test for polysemy is not infallible , but is rather merely a helpful conceptual aid . the difference between homonyms and polysemes is subtle . lexicography define polysemes within a single dictionary lemma , numbering different meanings , while homonyms are treated in separate lemmata . semantic shift can separate a polysemous word into separate homonyms . for example , check as in '' bank check '' ( or cheque ) , check in chess , and check meaning '' verification '' are considered homonyms , while they originated as a single word derived from chess in the 14th century . psycholinguistic experiments have shown that homonyms and polysemes are represented differently within people 's mental lexicon : while the different meanings of homonyms ( which are semantically unrelated ) tend to interfere or compete with each other during comprehension , this does not usually occur for the polysemes that have semantically related meanings . klepousniotou , e . , & baum , s.r . ( 2007 ) . disambiguating the ambiguity advantage effect in word recognition : an advantage for polysemous but not homonymous words . journal of neurolinguistics , 20 , 1-24 . doi:10.1016/j.jneuroling.2006.02.001 beretta , a . , fiorentino , r . , & poeppel , d . ( 2005 ) . the effects of homonymy and polysemy on lexical access : an meg study . cognitive brain research , 24 , 57-65 . doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.12.006 results for this contention , however , have been mixed . klein , d.e . , & murphy , g.l . ( 2001 ) . the representation of polysemous words . journal of memory and language , 45 , 259-282 . doi:10.1006/jmla.2001.2779 klein , d.e . , & murphy , g.l . ( 2002 ) . paper has been my ruin : conceptual relations of polysemous senses . journal of memory and language , 47 , 548-570 . doi:10.1016/s0749-596x ( 02 ) 00020-7 hino , y . , kusunose , y . , & lupker , s.j . ( 2010 ) . the relatedness-of-meaning effect for ambiguous words in lexical-decision tasks : when does relatedness matter ? canadian journal of experimental psychology , 64 , 180-196 . doi:10.1037/a0020475 hino , y . , pexman , p.m . , & lupker , s.j . ( 2006 ) . ambiguity and relatedness effects in semantic tasks : are they due to semantic coding ? journal of memory and language , 55 , 247-273 . doi:10.1016/j.jml.2006.04.001 for dick hebdige hebdige , d . ( 1979 ) . subculture : the meaning of style . new york : metheun . polysemy means that , '' each text is seen to generate a potentially infinite range of meanings , '' making , according to richard middleton , middleton , richard ( 1990/2002 ) . studying popular music . philadelphia : open university press . '' any homology , out of the most heterogeneous materials , possible . the idea of signifying practice—texts not as communicating or expressing a pre-existing meaning but as 'positioning subjects ' within a process of semiosis—changes the whole basis of creating social meaning '' . charles fillmore and beryl atkins ' definition stipulates three elements : ( i ) the various senses of a polysemous word have a central origin , ( ii ) the links between these senses form a network , and ( iii ) understanding the 'inner ' one contributes to understanding of the 'outer ' one . one group of polysemes are those in which a word meaning an activity , perhaps derived from a verb , acquires the meanings of those engaged in the activity , or perhaps the results of the activity , or the time or place in which the activity occurs or has occurred . sometimes only one of those meanings is intended , depending on context , and sometimes multiple meanings are intended at the same time . other types are derivations from one of the other meanings that leads to a verb or activity . examples . ; ; man : the human species ( i.e . , man vs . other organisms ) : males of the human species ( i.e . , man vs . woman ) : adult males of the human species ( i.e . , man vs . boy ) : ( as a verb ) to operate or constitute a vehicle or machine ( to man a ship ) this example shows the specific polysemy where the same word is used at different levels of a taxonomy . example 1 contains 2 , and 2 contains 3 . ; mole : a small burrowing mammal : a spot of pigmentation on the skin . ; bank : bank : the building where a financial institution offers services : a synonym for 'rely upon ' ( e.g . '' i 'm your friend , you can bank on me '' ) . it is different , but related , as it derives from the theme of security initiated by 1 . : however : 1 is loaned from italian banco , a money lenders shelf , while a river bank is a native english word . today they can be considered homonyms with completely different meanings . but originally they were polysemous since italian loaned the word from a germanic language . the proto-germanic cognate for '' shelf '' is bankiz . ( etymology on etymonline.com ) : bank '' earthen incline , edge of a river '' , c . 1200 , probably in old english but not attested in surviving documents , from a scandinavian source such as old norse banki , old danish banke '' sandbank , '' from proto-germanic bangkon '' slope , '' cognate with bankiz '' shelf '' . a river bank is typically visually shelf-like in its flatness , and it collects deposits which a financial bank also does . ; book : a bound collection of pages : a text reproduced and distributed ( thus , someone who has read the same text on a computer has read the same book as someone who had the actual paper volume ) : to make an action or event a matter of record ( e.g . '' unable to book a hotel room , a man sneaked into a nearby private residence where police arrested him and later booked him for unlawful entry . '' ) ; newspaper : a company that publishes written news . : a single physical item published by the company . : the newspaper as an edited work in a specific format ( e.g . '' they changed the layout of the newspaper 's front page '' ) . the different meanings can be combined in a single sentence , e.g . '' john used to work for the newspaper that you are reading . '' ; wood : the material made from trees : a geographical area with many trees ; crane : a bird with a long neck : a type of construction equipment which looks like it has a long neck : to strain out one 's neck ; mouse : a small rodent characteristically having a pointed snout , small rounded ears , a body-length scaly tail and a high breeding rate . : a hand-held pointing device that detects two-dimensional motion relative to a surface , which moves the cursor in accordance with its move . related ideas . a lexical conception of polysemy was developed by b . t . s . atkins , in the form of lexical implication rules . nicholas ostler , b.t.s . atkins '' predictable meaning shift : some linguistic properties of lexical implication rules '' ( 1991 ) proceedings of the first siglex workshop on lexical semantics and knowledge representation , springer-verlag . these are rules that describe how words , in one lexical context , can then be used , in a different form , in a related context . a crude example of such a rule is the pastoral idea of '' verbizing one 's nouns '' : that certain nouns , used in certain contexts , can be converted into a verb , conveying a related meaning . another clarification of polysemy is the idea of predicate transfer —the reassignment of a property to an object that would not otherwise inherently have that property . thus , the expression '' i am parked out back '' conveys the meaning of '' parked '' from '' car '' to the property of '' i possess a car '' . this avoids incorrect polysemous interpretations of '' parked '' : that '' people can be parked '' , or that '' i am pretending to be a car '' , or that '' i am something that can be parked '' . this is supported by the morphology : '' we are parked out back '' does not mean that there are multiple cars ; rather , that there are multiple passengers ( having the property of being in possession of a car ) .