Panel show

format . while many early panel shows stuck to the traditional quiz show format in which celebrities tried to get the right answers and win , the primary goal of modern panel shows is to entertain the audience with comedy , with the game or quiz structure providing subjects for the comedians to joke about . panel shows also feature comedic banter , friendly ribbing and camaraderie among the panelists . scoring is often deemphasized in panel shows . the american version of whose line is it anyway ? acknowledged this with the introduction , '' welcome to whose line is it anyway , the show where everything 's made up and the points do n't matter . '' qis opaque scoring system is purportedly a mystery even to its creator , i 'm sorry i have n't a clue dispenses with points altogether , and many other shows mention points only occasionally or at the end , instead of continuously displaying scores in front of players . panel shows can have any number of themes . many are topical and satire , such as wait wait . do n't tell me ! , have i got news for you , the news quiz and mock the week . 8 out of 10 cats is based on opinion polling ; what 's my line ? is about employment ; never mind the buzzcocks and face the music center on music ; a league of their own and a question of sport are sports-themed ; was it something i said ? , quote . unquote and who said that ? feature quotations ; my word ! involves wordplay ; i 've got a secret is about secrecy ; to tell the truth and would i lie to you ? deal with lies ; and it pays to be ignorant and i 'm sorry i have n't a clue are parody . some panel shows are variations of classic parlor games . twenty questions is based on the parlor game of the same name , give us a clue is modeled after charades , and call my bluff and balderdash are based on fictionary . frequently , a panel show features recurring panelists or permanent team captains , and some panelists appear on multiple panel shows . such permanent panelists are often a-list celebrities who can become more famous for their work on panel shows than for the marginal fame that initially earned them the position on the show . most shows are recorded before a studio audience . international production . united states . the first known example of a panel show in the world is the radio program information please , which debuted on 17 may 1938 on the nbc blue network . an evolution of the quiz show format , information please added the key element of a panel of celebrities , largely writers and intellectuals , but also actors and politicians . listeners would mail in questions , winning prizes for stumping the panel . u.s . panel shows transferred to television early in the medium 's history , with the first known example being play the game , a charades show that aired on dumont and abc beginning in 1946 . the celebrity charades concept has been replicated numerous times since then . the most popular adaptation was pantomime quiz , airing from 1947 to 1959 , and having runs on each of the four television networks operating at the time . other charades shows have included pantomime quiz ; movietown , rsvp ; celebrity charades ; showoffs and body language . tv panel shows saw their peak of popularity in the 1950s and '60s , when cbs ran the three longest-running panel shows in prime time : what 's my line ? , i 've got a secret and to tell the truth . at times , they were among the top ten shows on u.s . television , and they continue to experience occasional revivals . all three goodson-todman primetime shows were cancelled by cbs in 1967 amid ratings declines and trouble attracting younger viewers , although the programs were consistently profitable by being among the cheapest television shows to produce . their cancellations came as attention to demographics and a focus on younger viewers gained currency among advertisers . the departures of these three new york-based shows were also part of a mass migration of television production to los angeles , leaving only one primetime show produced on the east coast . later years saw several successes in the format , with match game ; hollywood squares ; the gong show ; win , lose or draw ; celebrity sweepstakes ; password and pyramid primarily running in the daytime and airing in their greatest numbers during the '70s and '80s . these panel shows marked a shift in the format : whereas cbs ' primetime shows had panelists guessing secrets about the guests , these new shows largely had panelists playing games with guests . later , the u.s . version of whose line is it anyway ? had a primetime run from 1998 to 2004 on abc , while wait wait . do n't tell me ! has become a popular weekend show on npr since 1998 . while wait wait continues to find success on the radio with a format driven by comedic banter similar to british shows , u.s . tv panel shows currently employ a format closer to traditional game shows that happen to have celebrity players . nbc has taken games such as charades , password and pictionary and repackaged them into hollywood game night , airing since 2013 , and nbc 's tonight show features many celebrities playing similar games with host jimmy fallon . comedy central aired midnight , in which comedians stand behind jeopardy ! -like podiums and buzz in to win points for punchlines . both nbc 's and comedy central 's takes on panel shows emphasize points , competing and winning in the style of traditional game shows , with less focus on comedic banter between the panelists that can be found on british panel shows . in 2013 , the cw revived whose line is it anyway ? , which features improv sketches . in 2014 , celebrity name game with craig ferguson premiered in syndication , in which players and celebrities try to get each other to guess famous names . in 2015 , abc announced primetime revivals for match game and to tell the truth . . united kingdom . panel shows are particularly popular in the united kingdom , where they 've found continued success since the bbc adapted its first radio panel shows from classic parlor games . perhaps the earliest uk panel show is the bbc radio adaptation of twenty questions , which debuted on 28 february 1947 . panel shows can have decades-long runs in the uk : twenty questions lasted until 1976 , while just a minute has remained on the air with the same host since 1967 . other long-running games on radio include i 'm sorry i have n't a clue since 1972 , the news quiz since 1977 , my word ! from 1956 to 1988 , and my music from 1967 to 1994 . the british version of what 's my line ? may have been the first television panel show in the uk , with an original run from 1951 to 1963 and several remakes in later years . the word game call my bluff aired from 1965 to 2005 , the charades show give us a clue ran from 1979 to 1992 , and the improv game whose line is it anyway ? aired from 1988 to 1998 . current british panel shows have become showcases for the nation 's top stand-up and improv comedians , as well as career-making opportunities for new comedians . regular comics on panel shows often go on to star in sitcoms and other tv shows . the modern british panel show format of tv comedy quizzes started with have i got news for you , a loose adaptation of bbc radio 4 's the news quiz . hignfy , as the show is sometimes known , began airing in 1990 , and often has the highest ratings of all shows on its night , regularly attracting as much as 20 % or more of all homes watching television . the show 's success grew after its transfer from bbc two to the flagship bbc one in 2000 . after hignfys success , panel shows have proliferated on british tv , including , among others , qi on various bbc channels since 2003 , mock the week on bbc two since 2005 , 8 out of 10 cats on channel 4 since 2005 , would i lie to you ? on bbc one since 2007 , and the annual special , the big fat quiz of the year on channel 4 since 2004 . on the radio , the news quiz , just a minute , i 'm sorry i have n't a clue and the unbelievable truth are among the most popular and long-running panel shows , all of which air on bbc radio 4 . british comedy panel shows feature mainly male guests . a 2016 study that analyzed 4,700 episodes from 1967 to 2016 found that 1,488 of them had an all-male lineup , and only one an all-female cast . the proportion of women rose from 3 % in 1989 to 31 % in 2016 . ( this is in particular contrast to the u.s . , where panel shows have traditionally had equal numbers of male and female panelists . ) . australia . australian panel shows include advertising-focused the gruen transfer and its various spinoffs on abc1 since 2008 , the music quiz spicks and specks on abc1 from 2005 to 2011 and again since 2014 , news quiz have you been paying attention ? on network ten since 2013 , and tabloid quiz dirty laundry live on abc1 and abc2 since 2013 . news quiz good news week aired on abc1 from 1996 to 2000 and on network ten from 2008 to 2012 , sports quiz a league of their own aired on network ten in 2013 , and pop culture quiz tractor monkeys aired on abc1 in 2013 . new zealand . new zealand panel shows include the news quiz 7 days since 2009 and the new zealand version of would i lie to you ? in 2012 . both air ( ed ) on tv3 . canada . canada panel show the debaters has aired on cbc radio one since 2006 , and in 2014 , super channel ordered 36 episodes of a panel show called too much information . a revival of match game aired on the comedy network from 2012 to 2014 , the news quiz front page challenge aired on cbc television from 1957 to 1995 , and the charades show party game aired in syndication from 1970 to 1981 . france . france panel shows include ( '' friday , everything goes '' ) , an improv game on tf1 since 2011 . earlier panel shows include , a linguistic game on ortf and tf1 from 1969 to 1981 ; ( '' the academy of nine '' ) , based on hollywood squares on antenne 2 from 1982 to 1987 ; cluedo , based on the board game cluedo on france 3 from 1994 to 1995 ; burger quiz on canal + from 2001 to 2002 ; ( '' incredible experiences '' ) , about scientific experiments on france 2 and france 3 from 2008 to 2012 ; and ( '' sofa quiz '' ) , an adaptation of hollywood game night on tmc in 2014 . germany . german panel shows include 7 tage , 7 köpfe ( '' 7 days , 7 heads '' ) , genial daneben ( '' idiot savant '' ) , kopfball ( '' headball '' ) , die montagsmaler ( '' pictionary '' ) , noch besserwissen ( '' even better knowledge '' ) , pssst … ( similar to i 've got a secret ) , die pyramide ( the german version of pyramid ) , quizfire , sag die wahrheit ( '' tell the truth '' , the german version of to tell the truth ) , typisch frau – typisch mann ( '' typical woman – typical man '' ) , was bin ich ? ( '' what am i ? '' , the german version of what 's my line ? ) and was denkt deutschland ? ( '' what does germany think ? '' ) . japan . early japanese panel shows include 話の泉 ( '' source of the story '' ) , based on information please on nhk radio 1 from 1946 to 1964 ; 二十の扉 ( '' twenty doors '' ) , based on twenty questions on nhk radio 1 from 1947 to 1960 ; ジェスチャー ( '' gestures '' ) , a charades show on nhk general tv from 1953 to 1968 ; and 私の秘密 ( '' my secret '' ) , based on i 've got a secret on nhk general tv from 1956 to 1967 . currently , a wide variety of japanese variety shows are popular , and many of them feature owarai comedians , japanese idols , and other celebrities playing games . some games involve bizarre physical stunts . brain wall , adapted in english-speaking countries as hole in the wall , has comedians attempt to jump through oddly shaped holes in moving walls without falling into water , dero and its successor tore have celebrities solve mental and physical challenges to escape traps and hazards or presumably die trying , vs arashi has a team of celebrities compete against j-pop group arashi and their plus one guest ( s ) in physical games , nep league has various celebrity teams competing in various quizzes that test their combined brainpower in the fields of japanese , english , general knowledge , etc . , and akbingo ! similarly features members of pop group akb48 and others competing in physical challenges and quizzes . other shows include 日本語探qバラエティ クイズ ! それマジ ! ? ニッポン ( '' is it really ! ? '' ) , a celebrity word game ; くりぃむクイズ ミラクル9 ( '' miracle 9 '' ) , a show somewhat similar to hollywood squares ; numer0n , a celebrity numbers game ; and オールスター感謝祭 ( '' all star thanksgiving '' ) , a semi-annual celebrity quiz . there are many other games featuring celebrities within japan 's variety genre . prime minister ōta is a show featuring many comedians and politicians debating fictional proposals in a sort of game show version of a legislative chamber . examples . front page challenge good news week hollywood game night hollywood squares it 's news to me i 've got a secret match game password says you ! spicks and specks the debaters the marriage ref to tell the truth wait wait… do n't tell me ! what 's my line ? body language . see also . panel discussion . references . external links . ukgameshows.com : list of panel games the british comedy guide : list of british panel shows