Eton wall game

scoring . the aim of the game is to move the ball towards the opponents ' end of the playing area . in those last few yards of the field is an area called the '' calx '' . in this area a player can earn a '' shy '' ( worth one point ) by lifting the ball against the wall with his foot . a teammate then touches the ball with his hand and shouts '' got it ! '' these two plays must happen within the calx . after this , if the umpire says '' given '' , the scoring team can attempt a goal ( worth a further nine points ) by throwing the ball at a designated target ( a garden door at one end of the field and a tree at the other end ) . a player can also score a kicked goal , worth five points , if he kicks the ball out and it hits a goal during the normal course of play . play . right the main game consists of the two sets of players forming a rugby-style scrummage ( called a '' bully '' ) in which neither team may '' furk '' the ball , which is to hook it backwards ( except in calx , where a different type of bully called a calx bully occurs ) . the bully is formed next to the wall and crabs slowly along the wall until the ball emerges . many players , particularly those whose position is actually against the wall , lose the skin off their elbows , hips and knees . because of this , players usually wear long sleeves . players within the bully shove and push each other , mostly with their bodies but also by placing their fists against the faces of the opposition and attempting to lever them backwards and away from the wall . actual punching is not permitted , and grabbing an opponent 's shirt ( '' holding '' ) is also not allowed . the fastest way to make ground is by kicking the ball upfield and out of play whenever it comes sideways out of the bully ; unlike most types of football , play is restarted opposite where the ball stops after it had gone out , or was touched after it had gone out . consequently , the most common tactic revolves around the formation of a 'phalanx ' . this consists of a tunnel ( coming out from the wall , diagonally forward from the position of the ball ) of players from one team who are crouching on hands and feet next to each other . once the team in possession of the ball has formed a successful phalanx , it attempts to pass the ball down the 'tunnel ' using the knees of the players forming it , to a player standing at the end of the phalanx ( i.e . furthest away from the wall ) , known as lines , whose job it is to kick the ball upfield . the team not in possession is constantly attempting to disrupt this , and win the ball back . the game lasts up to 55 minutes , with two halves of 25 minutes each and an additional 5 minutes as half-time break . many games end 0-0 . goals ( worth ten points ) are very rare ; they occur about once every 10 years , and no goals have been scored in the st andrew 's day game since 1909 . the most recent goal occurred in a match between ‘ d block ’ and ‘ c block ’ with a member of the ‘ d block ’ team hitting the door after scoring a shy in march 2017 . however , shies ( worth 1 point ) are scored more frequently . in the 2016 game , the 250th st . andrew 's day match , college triumphed 1–0 against the oppidans . this was the 107th consecutive st andrew 's day match in which no goals were scored by either team ; however , college scored a shy . organisation . the wall game is organised entirely by boys , particularly by the keepers ( captains ) of college wall , oppidan wall and mixed wall . famous past players of the wall game include boris johnson , who was keeper of the college wall , george orwell and harold macmillan . the first world war flying ace arthur rhys davids also played , representing college with ralph dominic gamble in 1915 . members of the college wall also annually commemorate the outstanding player and keeper of the wall logie leggatt , who was killed in the first world war at the age of 22 , making a toast at each year 's christmas sock supper with the words in piam memoriam l.c.l ( in affectionate memory of l.c.l ) . despite its renown outside the school , only a very small number of the 250 or so boys in each year group ever take part in the sport , unlike the lesser-known but much more widely played eton field game . the eton wall game has been played twice by all-female teams . history . the wall against which the game is played was constructed in 1717 . a possible early reference to the wall game occurs in the anonymously-published reminiscences of henry john blake ( born 1791 ) . blake reports that he was '' going away with the ball in style towards the goal , a large tree '' when he was fouled by an opponent . between 1811 and 1822 , '' football was almost confined to the wall game , and at most forty players , mostly constant '' , although there were also '' occasional trifling games in the open i.e . , the field game , rare in interval and rare in players '' . a letter from march 1821 states '' there is a wall . against which they play foot-ball in the season ; indeed they say it is capital weather for it now , but it is not the fashionable game , so nobody dares to propose it . '' the collegers v . oppidans match was banned in 1827 for ten years after a fight broke out during it . , quoted in it resumed by 1836 . an article on '' eton games '' in the 19 november 1832 issue of the eton college magazine includes a detailed description of the wall game ( called simply '' foot-ball '' ) . the 29 november 1840 issue of bell 's life in london features a description of '' the annual match . between collegers and oppidans '' played on 24 november 1840 : the collegers won by seven '' shies '' , with no goal being scored by either side . the article adds that this was '' the first time since 1836 that the oppidans have been beaten '' . the rules of the wall game were first written down in 1849 . they were subsequently revised in 1862 , 1871 , and 1953 . eton college archives possess copies of the rules from 1885 and 1933 . the 16th revision of the rules was made in 2001 . . in popular culture . the game was first televised by the bbc in 1948 . the british sitcom green wing features a fictional game , guyball , which parodies the obscurity of public school pastimes such as the eton wall game . it is introduced by guy secretan , who learned the sport at the fictional school whiteleaf . the object of the game is to throw balls in a '' topmiler '' , a wicker basket on top of a leather flying helmet . however , the rules of guyball are never fully explained and are designed to be as confusing and as difficult to understand as possible . fans of the show have however created their own rules , and the game was occasionally played 'for real ' . in terry pratchett 's discworld series , the ankh-morpork assassins ' guild has a far more sadistic variant of the '' wall game '' , and is essentially an extreme hybrid of rock-climbing and dodgeball . in the first of charlie higson 's young bond novels , silverfin , the young james bond comes to eton and learns the rules of the wall game . the game was a subject of the 1987 book , the sports hall of shame , by bruce nash and allan zullo . robert ludlum 's novel the bancroft strategy briefly describes the game , saying '' i believe the last time a goal was scored on a st . andrew 's day match was in 1909 , if you can believe it . '' frederick forsyth 's novel the cobra has a passing reference to the wall game . len deighton 's nameless protagonist in the ipcress file , in passing , compares the scene boarding an aeroplane to the eton wall game . see also . football english public school football games eton field game . references . bibliography . reprinted in james , sydney r . , '' eton football : the 'wall ' game '' , in reprinted with some alterations in . external links . eton college site on the wall game economist.com article on the game official wall game rules freinberg , tony ( july 24 , 2005 ) '' just do n't call them the eton wallflowers '' video footage of the wall game in 1914 colour video footage of the wall game in 1956