Jet aircraft

history . after the first instance of powered flight , a large number of jet engine designs were suggested . rené lorin , morize , harris proposed systems for creating a jet efflux . jet propulsion of aircraft part iii g geoffrey smith flight september 25th 1941 after other jet-engines had been run , romanian inventor henri coandă claimed to have built a jet-powered aircraft in 1910 , the coandă-1910 , however to support this claim , he had to make substantial alterations to the drawings he used to support his subsequently debunked claims . in fact the ducted-fan engine backfired , setting the aircraft on fire before any flights were ever made , and it lacked nearly all of the features necessary for a jet engine - including a lack of fuel injection , and any concern about hot jet efflux being directed at a highly flammable fabric surface . during the 1920s and 1930s a number of approaches were tried . a variety of motorjet , turboprop , pulsejet and rocket powered aircraft were designed . rocket-engine research was being carried out in germany and the first aircraft to fly under rocket power was the lippisch ente , in 1928 . '' lippisch ente . '' the internet encyclopedia of science : experimental aircraft . retrieved : 26 september 2011 . the ente had previously been flown as a glider . the next year , in 1929 , the opel rak.1 became the first purpose-built rocket aircraft to fly . the turbojet was invented in the 1930s , independently by frank whittle and later hans von ohain . the first turbojet aircraft to fly was the heinkel he 178 , on august 27 , 1939 in rostock ( germany ) . warsitz , lutz : the first jet pilot – the story of german test pilot erich warsitz ( p . 125 ) , pen and sword books ltd . , england , 2009 this was largely a proof of concept , as the problem of '' creep '' ( metal fatigue caused by the high temperatures within the engine ) had not been solved , and the engine quickly burned out . the first flight of a jet-propelled aircraft to come to public attention was the italian caproni campini n.1 motorjet prototype that flew on august 27 , 1940 . it was the first jet aircraft recognised by the fédération aéronautique internationale ( at the time the german he 178 program was still kept secret ) . campini began development of the motorjet in 1932 , which differed from a true turbojet , in that the air was driven through by a piston engine , instead of the exhaust gas , a much more complex solution . the british experimental gloster e.28/39 first took to the air on may 15 , 1941 , powered by sir frank whittle 's turbojet . '' no airscrew necessary . '' flight ( flightglobal.com ) , 27 october 1949 p554 the united states produced the bell xp-59a using two examples of a version of the whittle engine built by general electric , which flew on october 1 , 1942 . the meteor was the first production jet , with the first orders for production examples being made on 8 august 1941 , butler , 2006 , p.8 the prototype first flying on 5 march 1943 and the first production airframe flying on 12 january 1944 , butler , 2006 , p.23 while the first orders for production me 262 aircraft were not issued until 25 may 1943 , radinger , 1996 , p.33 and the first production me 262 did not fly until 28 march 1944 radinger , 1996 , p.49 despite the me 262 program having started earlier than that of the meteor , as projekt 1065 , with initial plans drawn up by dr waldemar voigt 's design team in april 1939 . the messerschmitt me 262 was the first operational jet fighter , hecht , heinrich . the world 's first turbojet fighter – messerschmitt me 262 . atglen , pennsylvania : schiffer publishing , 1990 . manufactured by germany during world war ii and entering service on 19 april 1944 with erprobungskommando 262 at lechfeld just south of augsburg . an me 262 scored the first combat victory for a jet fighter on 26 july 1944 . the me 262 had first flown on april 18 , 1941 , but mass production had not started until early 1944 with the first squadrons operational that year , too late for a decisive effect on the outcome of the world war ii . it was the fastest conventional aircraft of the war , although there were faster aircraft propelled by unconventional means , such as the rocket-powered messerschmitt me 163 komet . around this time , mid 1944 , the united kingdom 's gloster meteor was being committed to defence of the uk against the v-1 flying bomb & nbsp ; – itself a pulsejet-powered aircraft & nbsp ; and direct ancestor of the cruise missile– and then ground-attack operations over europe in the last months of the war . in 1944 germany introduced into service the arado ar 234 jet reconnaissance and bomber , though chiefly used in the former role , with the heinkel he 162 spatz single-jet light fighter premiering as 1944 ended . ussr tested its own bereznyak-isayev bi-1 in 1942 , but the project was scrapped by joseph stalin in 1945 . the imperial japanese navy also developed jet aircraft in 1945 , including the nakajima kikka , a modified , and slightly smaller version of the me 262 that had folding wings . by the end of 1945 , the us had introduced their first jet fighter , the lockheed p-80 shooting star into service and the uk its second fighter design , the de havilland vampire . the us introduced the north american b-45 tornado , their first jet bomber , into service in 1948 . although capable of carrying nuclear weapons it was used for reconnaissance over korea . on november 8 , 1950 , during the korean war , united states air force lt . russell j . brown , flying in an f-80 , intercepted two north korean mig-15s near the yalu river and shot them down in the first jet-to-jet dogfight in history . the uk put the english electric canberra into service in 1951 as a light bomber . it was designed to fly higher and faster than any interceptor . boac operated the first commercial jet service , from london to johannesburg , in 1952 with the de havilland comet jetliner . this highly innovative aircraft travelled far faster and higher than the propeller aircraft , was much quieter , smoother , and had stylish blended wings containing hidden jet engines . however , due to a design defect , and use of aluminium alloys , the aircraft suffered catastrophic metal fatigue which led to several crashes . jet ! when britain ruled the skies - bbc the series of crashes gave time for the boeing 707 to enter service in 1958 and this came to dominate the market for civilian airliners . the underslung engines were found to be advantageous in the event of a propellant leak , and so the 707 looked rather different from the comet : the 707 has a shape that is effectively the same as that of contemporary aircraft , with marked commonality still evident today for example with the 737 ( fuselage ) and a340 ( single deck , swept wing , four below-wing engines ) . turbofan aircraft began entering service in the 1950s and 1960s , bringing far greater fuel efficiency , and this is the type of jet in widespread use today . the tu-144 supersonic transport was the fastest commercial jet aircraft at mach 2.35 . it went into service in 1975 , but was withdrawn from commercial service shortly afterwards . the mach 2 concorde entered service in 1976 and flew for 27 years . the fastest military jet aircraft was the sr-71 blackbird at mach 3.35 . other jets . most people use the term 'jet aircraft ' to denote gas turbine based airbreathing jet engines , but rockets and scramjets are both also propelled by jet propulsion . cruise missiles are single-use unmanned jet aircraft , powered predominately by ramjets or turbojets or sometimes turbofans , but they will often have a rocket propulsion system for initial propulsion . the fastest airbreathing jet aircraft is the unmanned x-43 scramjet at around mach 9–10 . the fastest manned ( rocket ) aircraft is the x-15 at mach 6.85 . the space shuttle , while far faster than the x-43 or x-15 , was not regarded as an aircraft during ascent as it was carried ballistics by rocket thrust , rather than the air . during re-entry it was classed ( like a glider ) as an unpowered aircraft . the first flight was in 1981 . the bell 533 ( 1964 ) , lockheed xh-51 ( 1965 ) , and sikorsky s-69 ( 1977-1981 ) are examples of compound helicopter designs where jet exhaust added to forward thrust . the hiller yh-32 hornet and fairey ultra-light helicopter were among the many helicopters where the rotors were driven by tip jets . jet-powered wingsuits exist - powered by model aircraft jet engines - but of short duration and needing to be launched at height . . aerodynamics . because of the way they work , the typical exhaust speed of jet engines is transonic or faster , therefore most jet aircraft need to fly at high speeds , either supersonic or speeds just below the speed of sound ( '' transonic '' ) so as to achieve efficient flight . aerodynamics is therefore an important consideration . jet aircraft are usually designed using the whitcomb area rule , which says that the total area of cross-section of the aircraft at any point along the aircraft from the nose must be approximately the same as that of a sears-haack body . a shape with that property minimises the production of shockwaves which would waste energy . jet engines . jet engines come in several main types : turbojet turbofan ( which come in two main forms low bypass turbofan and high bypass turbofan ) rocket the different types are used for different purposes . rockets are the oldest type and are mainly used when extremely high speeds or extremely high altitudes are needed . due to the extreme , typically hypersonic , exhaust velocity and the necessity of oxidiser being carried on board , they consume propellant extremely quickly . for this reason , they are not practical for routine transportation . turbojets are the second oldest type ; it has a high , usually supersonic , exhaust speed and low frontal cross-section , and so is best suited to high-speed , usually supersonic , flight . although once widely used , they are relatively inefficient compared to turboprop and turbofans for subsonic flight . the last major aircraft to use turbojets were concorde and tu-144 supersonic transports . low bypass turbofans have a lower exhaust speed than turbojets and are mostly used for high sonic , transonic , and low supersonic speeds . high bypass turbofans are used for subsonic aircraft and are quite efficient and are widely used for airliners . flying characteristics . jet aircraft fly considerably differently to propeller aircraft . one difference is that jet engines respond relatively slowly . this complicates takeoff and landing maneuvers . in particular , during takeoff , propeller aircraft engines blow air over their wings and that gives more lift and a shorter takeoff . these differences caught out some early boac comet pilots . . propulsive efficiency . in aircraft overall propulsive efficiency \eta is the efficiency , in percent , with which the energy contained in a vehicle 's propellant is converted into useful energy , to replace losses due to air drag , gravity , and acceleration . it can also be stated as the proportion of the mechanical energy actually used to propel the aircraft . it is always less than 100 % because of kinetic energy loss to the exhaust , and less-than-ideal efficiency of the propulsive mechanism , whether a propeller , a jet exhaust , or a fan . in addition , propulsive efficiency is greatly dependent on air density and airspeed . mathematically , it is represented as \eta \eta_c \eta_p ch10-3 where \eta_c is the cycle efficiency and \eta_p is the propulsive efficiency . the cycle efficiency , in percent , is the proportion of energy that can be derived from the energy source that is converted to mechanical energy by the engine . for jet aircraft the propulsive efficiency ( essentially energy efficiency ) is highest when the engine emits an exhaust jet at a speed that is the same as , or nearly the same as , the vehicle velocity . the exact formula for air-breathing engines as given in the literature , k.honicke , r.lindner , p.anders , m.krahl , h.hadrich , k.rohricht . beschreibung der konstruktion der triebwerksanlagen . interflug , berlin , 1968 spittle , peter . '' gas turbine technology '' p507 , rolls-royce plc , 2003 . retrieved : 21 july 2012 . is : \eta_p \frac which is known as the breguet range equation after the french aviation pioneer louis charles breguet . see also . coandă-1910 commercial aviation contrail jet airliner jet noise jumbo jet very light jet list of jet aircraft of world war ii . references . citations . . bibliography . lutz warsitz : the first jet pilot – the story of german test pilot erich warsitz , pen and sword books ltd . , england , 2009 , , english edition . external links . the official erich warsitz website ( the world 's first jet pilot ) , inclusive rare videos ( heinkel he 178 ) and audio commentaries