Bruiser Brody

early life . goodish was an all-state football and basketball player at warren high school , michigan , and played football at west texas a & m university ( then known as west texas state ) and with four teams over three seasons in the tfl and the cofl . . professional wrestling career . after attending west texas a & m and working as a sportswriter goodish was trained to wrestle by fritz von erich . he first wrestled in dallas - fort worth and later louisiana . as bruiser brody and king kong brody ( the latter , a name he used in midwestern promotions out of respect for dick the bruiser ) , goodish competed as a freelancer in several companies including the central states wrestling ( csw ) , wwe ( wwwf ) , southwest championship wrestling ( scw ) , windy city wrestling , world wrestling council ( wwc ) , deep south wrestling ( dsw ) , championship wrestling from florida ( cwf ) , american wrestling association ( awa ) , and world class championship wrestling ( wccw ) . in the states , he had numerous feuds with the likes of kamala ( wrestler ) , abdullah the butcher , and '' crusher '' jerry blackwell . in japan , he was in a tag team with stan hansen . brody had a reputation for refusing to job to other wrestlers . he also competed under the moniker of red river jack in texas , during an angle against gary hart 's men and skandor akbar 's army in world class championship wrestling . brody also competed as the masked marauder at one time in the awa . in 1976 , he went to vince mcmahon , sr . wwwf where he challenged wwwf champion bruno sammartino but was unsuccessful in winning the championship . brody also teamed with big john studd . it was also in the wwwf where he wrestled invader 1 ( josé gonzález ) , for whom he refused to sell . in 1985 , he had a very short stint with new japan pro wrestling ( njpw ) in a feud with antonio inoki and many of their matches ended in no contests or disqualifications . in 1987 , brody began working primarily for the world wrestling council in puerto rico after getting fired from new japan . brody continued his feud with abdullah the butcher , as well as engaging in a feud with carlos colon . he briefly returned to all japan pro wrestling to win his last nwa international heavyweight championship . on april 15 , 1988 , the first attempt to form what became the triple crown heavyweight championship was done when brody faced off against nwa united national and pwf champion genichiro tenryu ; the result was a double countout . brody lost the title to jumbo tsuruta four days later . in wccw in texas he was actually a babyface , most often against abdullah the butcher . however against abdullah in montreal he was a heel managed by floyd creatchman . while there tim '' killer '' brooks acted as his brother buster brody . brody was in an ongoing feud with the russian brute who later went on to awa fame with manager ox baker . due to his huge reputation in japan promoter giant baba had the match taped and later aired on japanese tv . in florida he beat b . brian blair for the florida state championship . brody had an infamous cage match with lex luger in florida on january 21 , 1987 . in the middle of the match , brody stopped '' working '' and stood around . luger and bill alfonso , the referee of the match , were puzzled and attempted to speak to brody who did not respond . luger and alfonso decided to forgo the planned finish of the match and alfonso disqualified luger in a spot where luger continually punched brody in a corner and did not back off . after the match , luger recalls asking brody if he did anything wrong to upset him , to which brody responded '' no '' , and brody 's reasons for not working were not very clear , stating that '' the match just was n't working '' . in larry matysik 's book , wrestling at the chase , matysik states that before the match brody told him '' i 'm not putting up with any of his bullshit '' and that brody was upset that luger would not sell for him . however , when watching the match , it is clear that luger did sell for brody . in a later shoot interview , bill alfonso said that there was a miscommunication issue on who would lead the match and there was no ill will ever between the two . another scenario was that brody was upset with the promoters over his paychecks ( brody had a contentious history with wrestling promoters for much of his career ) and decided to embarrass the promotion by being uncooperative in the match . in 1987 he returned to the awa where he fought greg gagne and jerry blackwell . despite his reputation as being disagreeable with promoters he would aid any who needed a boost in ticket sales as he was guaranteed to bring in crowds . while working for wccw in texas he was the booker and produced their tv program . personal life . prior to his wrestling career , goodish worked as a sportswriter in san antonio , texas . goodish was married on june 4 , 1968 , to nola marie neece ; the marriage ended in divorce on october 12 , 1970 . goodish 's second wife , new zealander barbara smith , remained with him until his death in 1988 . she has stated that while his wrestling persona was known for brutality and being uncontrollable , brody was the complete opposite with his family . brody and smith lived in texas . together they had a son named geoffrey dean , born november 7 , 1980 . . death . on july 16 , 1988 , brody was in the locker room before his scheduled match with dan spivey at juan ramón loubriel stadium in bayamón ( a city near san juan , puerto rico ) , when josé huertas gonzález , a fellow wrestler and booker , foley , mick . have a nice day : a tale of blood and sweatsocks ( p.115 ) allegedly asked him to step into the shower area to discuss business . there was an argument between the two wrestlers and a scuffle ensued . due to the design of the dressing room , there were no witnesses to the altercation . however , two screams were heard , loud enough for the entire locker room to hear . tony atlas ran to the shower and saw brody bent over and holding his stomach . atlas then looked up at gonzález and saw him holding a knife . atlas , tony . atlas too much . too soon . crowbar press . ( p.197-205 ) due to the heavy traffic outdoors and large crowd in the stadium it took paramedics close to an hour to reach brody . when the paramedics arrived , atlas helped carry brody downstairs to the waiting ambulance as , due to brody 's size , paramedics were unable to lift him . he later died from his stab wounds . gonzález claimed self-defense and testified in his own defense . he was acquitted of murder in 1989 . the prosecution witnesses living outside of puerto rico did not show up , claiming they had not received their summons until after the trial had ended . fellow wrestlers dutch mantel and tony atlas have said that in the 1970s , when brody and gonzález had wrestled each other , brody had wrestled very roughly and beat up gonzález . sd jones claims after one such match gonzález said to him '' one day i am gon na kill that man '' . in april 2019 , brody 's death was featured on vice 's dark side of the ring - season 1 , episode 3 , which included interviews with dutch mantel , tony atlas and abdullah the butcher . dark side of the ring . championships and accomplishments . all japan pro wrestling nwa international heavyweight championship ( 3 times ) nwa international heavyweight title history at wrestling-titles.com pwf world tag team championship ( 1 time ) – with stan hansen world 's strongest tag determination league ( 1981 ) – with jimmy snuka world 's strongest tag determination league ( 1983 ) – with stan hansen january 3 korakuen hall heavyweight battle royal ( 1979 ) champion carnival fighting spirit award ( 1981 ) world 's strongest tag determined league exciting award ( 1982 ) – with stan hansen cauliflower alley club posthumous award ( 2015 ) central states wrestling nwa central states heavyweight championship ( 1 time ) nwa central states heavyweight title history at wrestling-titles.com nwa central states tag team championship ( 1 time ) – with ernie ladd nwa central states tag team title history at wrestling-titles.com championship wrestling from florida nwa florida heavyweight championship ( 1 time ) nwa florida heavyweight title history at wrestling-titles.com george tragos/lou thesz professional wrestling hall of fame frank gotch award ( 2018 ) national wrestling federation nwf international championship ( 1 time ) world class championship wrestling wcwa world heavyweight championship ( 4 times ) wcwa world tag team championship ( 3 times ) – with kerry von erich nwa texas hardcore championship ( 8 times ) nwa texas heavyweight championship ( 1 time ) nwa texas tag team championship ( 3 times ) – with mike york ( 1 ) , gino hernandez ( 1 ) , and kerry von erich ( 1 ) wccw television championship ( 1 time ) nwa tri-state nwa united states tag team championship ( tri-state version ) ( 2 time ) – with stan hansen nwa united states tag team title ( tri-state version ) history at wrestling-titles.com professional wrestling hall of fame class of 2014 pro wrestling illustrated editor 's award ( 1988 ) tied with adrian adonis ranked no . 14 of the 500 top wrestlers of the '' pwi years '' in 2003 southwest championship wrestling scw southwest brass knuckles championship ( 1 time ) scw southwest brass knuckles title history at wrestling-titles.com scw world tag team championship ( 1 time ) – with dick slater scw world tag team title history at wrestling-titles.com st . louis wrestling hall of fame class of 2007 southern wrestling hall of fame class of 2013 tokyo sports lifetime achievement award ( 1988 ) western states sports nwa western states heavyweight championship ( 1 time ) nwa western states heavyweight title history at wrestling-titles.com world championship wrestling ( australia ) world brass knuckles championship ( 1 time ) world wrestling association wwa world heavyweight championship ( 1 time ) wwa world heavyweight title ( indianapolis ) history at wrestling-titles.com wwe wwe hall of fame ( class of 2019 ) wrestling observer newsletter best brawler ( 1980–1984 , 1987 , 1988 ) wrestling observer newsletter hall of fame ( class of 1996 ) . see also . list of premature professional wrestling deaths '' the killing of bruiser brody ''