Magnesium hydroxide

preparation . combining a solution of many magnesium salts with alkaline water induces precipitate of solid mg ( oh ) 2 : : mg 2+ + 2 oh − → mg ( oh ) 2 on a commercial scale , mg ( oh ) 2 is produced by treating seawater with lime ( ca ( oh ) 2 ) . ( 158,503 us gallons ) of seawater gives about one ton of mg ( oh ) 2 . ca ( oh ) 2 is far more soluble than mg ( oh ) 2 , so the latter precipitates as a solid : : mgo + h2o - > mg ( oh ) 2 . uses . precursor to mgo . most mg ( oh ) 2 that is produced industrially , as well as the small amount that is mined , is converted to fused magnesia ( mgo ) . magnesia is valuable because it is both a poor electrical conductor and an excellent thermal conductor . . health . . metabolism . magnesium hydroxide is used in suspension as either an antacid or a laxative , depending on concentration . as an antacid , magnesium hydroxide is dosed at approximately 0.5–1.5g in adults and works by simple neutralization , where the hydroxide ions from the mg ( oh ) 2 combine with acidic h + ions produced in the form of hydrochloric acid by parietal cells in the stomach to produce water . as a laxative , magnesium hydroxide is dosed at 2–5g , and works in a number of ways . first , mg 2+ is poorly absorbed from the intestinal tract , so it draws water from the surrounding tissue by osmosis . not only does this increase in water content soften the feces , it also increases the volume of feces in the intestine ( intraluminal volume ) which naturally stimulates intestinal motility . furthermore , mg 2+ ions cause the release of cholecystokinin ( cck ) , which results in intraluminal accumulation of water , electrolytes , and increased intestinal motility . some sources claim that the hydroxide ions themselves do not play a significant role in the laxative effects of milk of magnesia , as basic solutions ( i.e . , solutions of hydroxide ions ) are not strongly laxative , and non-basic mg 2+ solutions , like mgso 4 , are equally strong laxatives , mole for mole . only a small amount of the magnesium from magnesium hydroxide is usually absorbed by the intestine ( unless one is deficient in magnesium ) . however , magnesium is mainly excreted by the kidneys so long-term , daily consumption of milk of magnesia by someone suffering from kidney failure could lead in theory to hypermagnesemia . unabsorbed drug is excreted in feces ; absorbed drug is excreted rapidly in urine . . history of milk of magnesia . on may 4 , 1818 , american inventor john callen received a patent ( no . x2952 ) for magnesium hydroxide . patent usx2952 - magnesia , medicated , liquid - google patents in 1829 , sir james murray used a '' condensed solution of fluid magnesia '' preparation of his own design michael hordern , a world elsewhere ( 1993 ) , p . 2 . to treat the lord lieutenant of ireland , the marquis of anglesey , of stomach pain . this was so successful ( advertised in australia and approved by the royal college of surgeons in 1838 ) that he was appointed resident physician to anglesey and two subsequent lords lieutenant , and knighted . his fluid magnesia product was patented two years after his death in 1873 . ulster history . sir james murray – inventor of milk of magnesia . 1788 to 1871 , 24 february 2005 the term milk of magnesia was first used by charles henry phillips in 1872 for a suspension of magnesium hydroxide formulated at about 8 % w/v . when was phillips ' milk of magnesia introduced ? faq , phillipsrelief.com , accessed 4 july 2016 it was sold under the brand name phillips ' milk of magnesia for medicinal usage . although the name may at some point have been owned by glaxosmithkline , uspto registrations show '' milk of magnesia '' results from the tarr web server : milk of magnesia and '' phillips ' milk of magnesia '' results from the tarr web server : phillips ' milk of magnesia have both been assigned to bayer since 1995 . in the uk , the non-brand ( generic ) name of '' milk of magnesia '' and '' phillips ' milk of magnesia '' is '' cream of magnesia '' ( magnesium hydroxide mixture , bp ) . it was used in steven spielberg 's first short movie called amblin ' . as food additive . it is added directly to human food , and is affirmed as generally recognized as safe by the fda . it is known as e number e528 . magnesium hydroxide is marketed for medical use as chewable tablets , as capsules , powder , and as liquid suspensions , sometimes flavored . these products are sold as antacids to neutralize stomach acid and relieve indigestion and heartburn . it also is a laxative to alleviate constipation . as a laxative , the osmosis force of the magnesia acts to draw fluids from the body . high doses can lead to diarrhea , and can deplete the body 's supply of potassium , sometimes leading to muscle cramps . magnesium hydroxide – revolution health some magnesium hydroxide products sold for antacid use ( such as maalox ) are formulated to minimize unwanted laxative effects through the inclusion of aluminum hydroxide , which inhibits the contractions of smooth muscle cells in the gastrointestinal tract , thereby counterbalancing the contractions induced by the osmotic effects of the magnesium hydroxide . other niche uses . magnesium hydroxide is also a component of antiperspirant . milk of magnesia makes good antiperspirant magnesium hydroxide is useful against canker sores ( aphthous ulcer ) when used topically . canker sores , 2/1/2009 . waste water treatment . magnesium hydroxide powder is used industrially to neutralize acidic wastewaters . aileen gibson and michael maniocha white paper : the use of magnesium hydroxide slurry for biological treatment of municipal and industrial wastewater , august 12 , 2004 it is also a component of the biorock method of building artificial reefs . fire retardant . natural magnesium hydroxide ( brucite ) is used commercially as a fire retardant . most industrially used magnesium hydroxide is produced synthetically . like aluminium hydroxide , solid magnesium hydroxide has smoke suppressing and flame retardant properties . this property is attributable to the thermal decomposition it undergoes at 332 & nbsp ; °c ( 630 & nbsp ; °f ) : : mg ( oh ) 2 → mgo + h 2 o the heat absorbed by the reaction retards the fire by delaying ignition of the associated substance . the water released dilutes combustible gases . common uses of magnesium hydroxide as a flame retardant include additives to cable insulation ( i.e . cables for high quality cars , submarines , the airbus a380 , bugatti veyron and the playstation 4 , playstation 2 , etc . ) , insulation plastics , roofing ( e.g . london olympic stadium ) , and various flame retardant coatings . other mineral mixtures that are used in similar fire retardant applications are natural mixtures of huntite and hydromagnesite . . mineralogy . brucite , the mineral form of mg ( oh ) 2 commonly found in nature also occurs in the 1:2:1 clay minerals amongst others , in chlorite , in which it occupies the interlayer position normally filled by monovalent and divalent cations such as na + , k + , mg 2+ and ca 2+ . as a consequence , chlorite interlayers are cemented by brucite and can not swell nor shrink . brucite , in which some of the mg 2+ cations have been substituted by al 3+ cations , becomes positively charged and constitutes the main basis of layered double hydroxide ( ldh ) . ldh minerals as hydrotalcite are powerful anion sorbents but are relatively rare in nature . brucite may also crystallise in cement and concrete in contact with seawater . indeed , the mg 2+ cation is the second most abundant cation in seawater , just behind na + and before ca 2+ . because brucite is a swelling mineral , it causes a local volumetric expansion responsible for tensile stress in concrete . this leads to the formation of cracks and fissures in concrete , accelerating its degradation in seawater . for the same reason , dolomite can not be used as construction aggregate for making concrete . the reaction of magnesium carbonate with the free alkali hydroxides present in the cement porewater also leads to the formation of expansive brucite . : mgco 3 + 2 naoh → mg ( oh ) 2 + na 2 co 3 this reaction , one of the two main alkali–aggregate reaction ( aar ) is also known as alkali–carbonate reaction . references .