1997 in literature

events . february 20 – allen ginsberg makes a final public appearance at the nyu poetry slam . he continues to write through his final illness , his last poem being '' things i 'll not do ( nostalgias ) '' written on march 30 . may 27 – shakespeare 's globe in london , a reconstruction of the elizabethan globe theatre , opens with a production of shakespeare 's henry v . june 3 – the supposed climax of max beerbohm 's 1916 short story '' enoch soames '' occurs at the old british museum reading room in london . june 26 – j . k . rowling 's first harry potter novel , harry potter and the philosopher 's stone , is published in london by bloomsbury publishing , in an edition of 500 copies . july 13 – the release occurs in ireland ) of the film of patrick mccabe 's 1992 novel the butcher boy . the author plays jimmy the skite , the town drunk . october – the online literary magazine jacket is founded . november 24 – the new british library building in london designed by colin st john wilson opens to readers . december 30 – the memoir i know why the caged bird sings by maya angelou is removed from the ninth-grade english curriculum in anne arundel county , maryland , for portraying '' white people as being horrible , nasty , stupid people '' . uncertain dates tom clancy signs a deal with pearson custom publishing and penguin putnam inc . giving him us 50 million for the world english rights to two new books . a second agreement pays another 25 million for a four-year book/multimedia deal , and a third , with berkley books for 24 paperbacks to tie in with an abc television miniseries for 22 million . janet dailey admits to plagiarism of the novels of the fellow american bestselling romance writer nora roberts . . new books . fiction . ben aaronovitch and kate orman – so vile a sin mitch albom – tuesdays with morrie martin amis – night train iain banks – a song of stone john banville – the untouchable hazel barnes – the story i tell myself marie bashkirtseff ( died 1884 ) – i am the most interesting book of all ( translation ) raymond benson – tomorrow never dies and zero minus ten jonathan blum and kate orman – vampire science roberto bolaño – last evenings on earth ( llamadas telefonicas ) pascal bruckner – les voleurs de beauté simon bucher-jones – ghost devices christopher bulis – a device of death tim burton – the melancholy death of oyster boy & other stories candace bushnell – sex and the city peter carey – jack maggs caleb carr – the angel of darkness agatha christie ( died 1976 ) – collected short stories the harlequin tea set while the light lasts and other stories daniel clowes – ghost world ( graphic novel ) warwick collins – gents bernard cornwell sharpe 's tiger excalibur : a novel of arthur patricia cornwell hornet 's nest unnatural exposure paul cornell – oh no it is n't ! jim crace – quarantine robert crais – indigo slam ann c . crispin the hutt gambit the paradise snare 'misha defonseca ' – misha : a mémoire of the holocaust years ( published as non-fiction ) don delillo – underworld anita diamant – the red tent terrance dicks the eight doctors mean streets fernanda eberstadt – when the sons of heaven meet the daughters of the earth bernardine evaristo – lara charles frazier – cold mountain anthony frewin – london blues anastasia gosteva – дочь самурая ( the samurai 's daughter ) john grisham – the partner barbara hambly – planet of twilight allison hedge coke – dog road woman matt jones – beyond the sun sebastian junger – the perfect storm winona laduke – last standing woman joe r . lansdale – bad chili paul leonard – genocide ann-marie macdonald – fall on your knees bernard maclaverty – grace notes ian r . macleod – voyages by starlight norman mailer – the gospel according to the son ian mcewan – enduring love david a . mcintee – the dark path lawrence miles alien bodies down mark morris – the bodysnatchers toni morrison – paradise jim mortimore – eternity weeps ryū murakami ( 村上 龍 ) – in the miso soup ( イン ザ・ミソスープ , english translation 2005 ) courttia newland – the scholar kate orman – the room with no doors hanne ørstavik – kjærlighet ( love ) lance parkin – the dying days james patterson – cat and mouse cyril pearl – morisson of peking john peel – war of the daleks pepetela – a gloriosa família marc platt – lungbarrow terry pratchett – jingo annie proulx – brokeback mountain ( short story ) thomas pynchon – mason & dixon kathy reichs – déjà dead nina revoyr – the necessary hunger justin richards – dragons ' wrath mordecai richler – barney 's version gareth roberts – the well-mannered war philip roth – american pastoral arundhati roy – the god of small things don miguel ruiz – the four agreements gary russell deadfall instruments of darkness will self – great apes carol shields – larry 's party sidney sheldon – the best laid plans michael stackpole – the bacta war danielle steel the ghost the ranch special delivery dave stone burning heart ship of fools william sutcliffe – are you experienced ? antonio tabucchi – the missing head of damasceno monteiro ( la testa perduta di damasceno monteiro ) eckhart tolle – the power of now zlatko topčić – nightmare kurt vonnegut – timequake lulu wang – het lelietheater ( the lily theatre ) niall williams – four letters of love connie willis – to say nothing of the dog timothy zahn – specter of the past roger zelazny and jane lindskold – donnerjack . children and young people . lynne reid banks – harry the poisonous centipede : a story to make you squirm ( first in the harry the poisonous centipede trilogy ) 'asta bowen – wolf : a journey home nancy butts - the door in the lake cao wenxuan ( 曹文軒 ) – the grass house ( 草房子 ) sarah ferguson – budgie the little helicopter ( first in an eponymous series of five books ) cornelia funke – dragon rider virginia hamilton ( with barry moser ) – a ring of tricksters : animal tales from america , the west indies , and africa mark helprin ( with chris van allsburg ) – the veil of snows william mayne – lady muck ( illustrated by jonathan heale ) eloise jarvis mcgraw – the moorchild junko morimoto – the two bullies barbara nichol ( with barry moser ) – dippers dav pilkey – the adventures of captain underpants philip pullman – the subtle knife rick riordan – big red tequila j . k . rowling – harry potter and the philosopher 's stone ron roy – the absent author ( first in the a to z mysteries series of 26 books ) vivian walsh – olive , the other reindeer jacqueline wilson – girls in love . drama . jon fosse – nightsongs lee hall – spoonface steinberg ( radio monologue ) moisés kaufman – gross indecency : the three trials of oscar wilde thomas kilroy – the secret fall of constance wilde conor mcpherson – the weir patrick marber – closer richard nelson – goodnight children everywhere peter whelan – the herbal bed . poetry . ted hughes – tales from ovid . non-fiction . dave barry – dave barry 's book of bad songs jean-dominique bauby – the diving bell and the butterfly ( le scaphandre et le papillon ) cari beauchamp – without lying down : frances marion and the powerful women of early hollywood jan bondeson – a cabinet of medical curiosities bill bryson – a walk in the woods d . k . chakrabarti – colonial indology : sociopolitics of the ancient indian past iris chang – the rape of nanking jared diamond – guns , germs and steel jenny diski – skating to antarctica michael drosnin – the bible code gerina dunwich – a wiccan 's guide to prophecy and divination geoff dyer – out of sheer rage : in the shadow of d . h . lawrence timothy ferris – the whole shebang : a state-of-the-universe ( s ) report benjamin fondane ( died 1944 ) – le voyageur n ' a pas fini de voyager stephen fry – moab is my washpot ( autobiography ) charlotte gray – mrs . king alan guth – the inflationary universe robert hughes – american visions : the epic history of art in america jesse lee kercheval – building fiction geneviève lacambre – gustave moreau : maître sorcier b . b . lal – the earliest civilization of south asia : rise , maturity , and decline peter maas – underboss deborah madison & ndash ; vegetarian cooking for everyone james mcbride – the color of water adele morales – the last party ian smith – the great betrayal alan sokal and jean bricmont – fashionable nonsense maria todorova – imagining the balkans kevin warwick – march of the machines . deaths . january 19 – james dickey , american poet and novelist ( born 1923 ) february 3 – bohumil hrabal , czech novelist ( born 1914 ) february 18 – emily hahn , american journalist and author ( born 1905 ) april 5 – allen ginsberg , american poet ( liver cancer , born 1926 ) may 9 – rina lasnier , canadian poet ( born 1915 ) may 23 – alison adburgham , english social historian and journalist ( born 1912 ) june 8 – george turner , australian novelist and critic ( born 1916 ) july 26 – joseph henry reason , american librarian ( born 1905 ) august 2 – william s . burroughs , american novelist ( born 1914 2003 penguin modern classics edition of junky . august 16 – gerard mclarnon , irish actor and playwright ( born 1915 ) august 27 – johannes edfelt , swedish poet , translator and critic ( born 1904 ) october 14 – harold robbins , american novelist ( born 1916 ) october 16 – james a . michener , american novelist and historian ( born 1907 ) november 6 – leon forrest , african american novelist and essayist ( cancer , born 1937 ) onishi , norimitsu . '' leon forrest , 60 , a novelist who explored black history '' , the new york times , november 10 , 1997 . november 30 – kathy acker , american novelist and poet ( breast cancer , born 1947 ) kathy acker and transnationalism , ed . polina mackay and kathryn nicol ( cambridge scholars , 2009 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : dario fo europe theatre prize : robert wilson camões prize : pepetela . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : eva sallis , hiam c . j . dennis prize for poetry : les murray , subhuman redneck poems kenneth slessor prize for poetry : anthony lawrence , the viewfinder mary gilmore prize : morgan yasbincek , night reversing miles franklin award : david foster , the glade within the grove . canada . bronwen wallace memorial award : rachel rose giller prize : mordecai richler , barney 's version see 1997 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : anne mullens , timely death faculty of arts , 1997 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , anne mullens , retrieved 11/17/2012 . france . prix goncourt : patrick rambaud , la bataille prix décembre : lydie salvayre , la compagnie des spectres prix médicis international : t . coraghessan boyle , america prix médicis french : les sept noms du peintre – philippe le guillou . spain . premio miguel de cervantes : guillermo cabrera infante . united kingdom . booker prize : arundhati roy , the god of small things carnegie medal for children 's literature : tim bowler , river boy james tait black memorial prize for fiction : andrew miller , ingenious pain james tait black memorial prize for biography : r . f . foster , william butler yeats : a life , volume 1 – the apprentice mage 1965-1914 cholmondeley award : alison brackenbury , gillian clarke , tony curtis , anne stevenson eric gregory award : matthew clegg , sarah corbett , polly clark , tim kendall , graham nelson , matthew welton orange prize for fiction : anne michaels , fugitive pieces whitbread best book award : ted hughes , tales from ovid . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : richard blanco , city of a hundred fires aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : fred chappell american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry , john ashbery compton crook award : richard garfinkle , celestial matters hugo award : kim stanley robinson , blue mars nebula award : vonda mcintyre , the moon and the sun newbery medal for children 's literature : e . l . konigsburg , the view from saturday pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : steven millhauser – martin dressler : the tale of an american dreamer pulitzer prize for poetry : lisel mueller : alive together : new and selected poems wallace stevens award : anthony hecht whiting awards : : fiction : josip novakovich ( fiction/nonfiction ) , melanie rae thon : nonfiction : jo ann beard , suketu mehta ( fiction/nonfiction ) , ellen meloy : plays : erik ehn : poetry : connie deanovich , forrest gander , jody gladding , mark turpin . elsewhere . international dublin literary award : javier marías , a heart so white premio nadal : carlos cañeque , quién . notes .