Hélène Cixous

life and career . personal life . cixous was born in oran , french algeria to jewish parents , eve cixous , née klein , ( 1910–2013 ) and georges cixous ( 1909–1948 ) . georges cixous , a physician who had written his dissertation on tuberculosis , died of the disease in 1948 . eve cixous became a midwife following his death , '' until her expulsion with the last french doctors and midwives in 1971 . '' cixous ' brother , pierre , '' a medical student and a supporter of algerian independence '' was condemned to death in 1961 by the organisation armée secrète , and would join cixous in bordeaux . her mother and brother would return to algeria following the country 's independence in 1962 . they would be arrested , and cixous '' obtained their release with the help of ahmed ben bella 's lawyer . '' cixous married guy berger in 1955 , with whom she had three children , anne-emmanuelle ( b . 1958 ) , stéphane ( 1960–1961 ) , and pierre-françois ( b . 1961 ) . cixous and berger divorced in 1964 . . academic career . cixous earned her agrégation in english in 1959 and her doctorate in 1968 . her main focus , at this time , was english literature and the works of james joyce . cixous became assistante at the university of bordeaux in 1962 , served as maître assistante at the sorbonne from 1965 to 1967 , and was appointed maître de conférence at paris nanterre university in 1967 . in 1968 , following the french student riots , cixous was charged with founding the university of paris viii , '' created to serve as an alternative to the traditional french academic environment . '' cixous would , in 1974 , found the university 's center for women 's studies , the first in europe . cixous is a professor at the university of paris viii and at the european graduate school in saas-fee , switzerland . . publications . in 1968 , cixous published her doctoral dissertation l'exil de james joyce ou l'art du remplacement ( the exile of james joyce , or the art of displacement ) and the following year she published her first novel , dedans ( inside ) , a semi-autobiographical work that won the prix médicis . she has published widely , including twenty-three volumes of poems , six books of essays , five plays , and numerous influential articles . she published voiles ( veils ) with jacques derrida and her work is often considered deconstruction . in introducing her wellek lecture , subsequently published as three steps on the ladder of writing , derrida referred to her as the greatest living writer in his language ( french ) . cixous wrote a book on derrida titled portrait de jacques derrida en jeune saint juif ( portrait of jacques derrida as a young jewish saint ) . her reading of derrida finds additional layers of meaning at a phoneme rather than strictly lexicon level . not the same as puns , which play on the varied means of a word or phrase or the homonyms thereof . in addition to derrida and joyce , she has written monographs on the work of the brazilian writer clarice lispector , on maurice blanchot , franz kafka , heinrich von kleist , michel de montaigne , ingeborg bachmann , thomas bernhard , and the russian poet marina tsvetaeva . cixous is also the author of essays on artists , including simon hantaï , pierre alechinsky and adel abdessemed to whom she has devoted two books . along with luce irigaray and julia kristeva , cixous is considered one of the mothers of poststructuralist feminist theory . in the 1970s , cixous began writing about the relationship between sexuality and language . like other poststructuralist feminist theorists , cixous believes that our sexuality is directly tied to how we communicate in society . in 1975 , cixous published her most influential article '' le rire de la méduse '' ( '' the laugh of the medusa '' ) , which was revised by her , translated into english by paula cohen and keith cohen , and released in english in 1976 . she has published over 70 works ; her fiction , dramatic writing and poetry , however , are not often read in english . the bibliothèque nationale de france . in 2000 , a collection in cixous ' name was created at the bibliothèque nationale de france after cixous donated the entirety of her manuscripts to date . they then featured in the exhibit '' brouillons d'écrivains '' held there in 2001 . in 2003 , the bibliothèque held the conference '' genèses généalogies genres : autour de l'oeuvre d'hélène cixous '' . among the speakers were mireille calle-gruber , marie odile germain , jacques derrida , annie leclerc , ariane mnouchkine , ginette michaud , and hélène cixous herself . film . hélène cixous is featured in olivier morel 's 118-minute film ever , rêve , hélène cixous ( france , usa , 2018 ) . . influences on cixous ' writing . some of the most notable influences on her writings have been jacques derrida , sigmund freud , jacques lacan and arthur rimbaud . sigmund freud . psychoanalyst sigmund freud established the initial theories which would serve as a basis for some of cixous ' arguments in developmental psychology . freud 's analysis of gender roles and sexual identity concluded with separate paths for boys and girls through the oedipus complex , theories of which cixous was particularly critical . jacques derrida . contemporaries , lifelong friends , and intellectuals , jacques derrida and cixous both grew up as french jews in algeria and share a '' belonging constituted of exclusion and nonbelonging '' —not algerian , rejected by france , their jewishness concealed or acculturated . in derrida 's family '' one never said 'circumcision ' but 'baptism , ' not 'bar mitzvah ' but 'communion . ' '' judaism cloaked in catholicism is one example of the undecidability of identity that influenced the thinker whom cixous calls a '' jewish saint '' . her book portrait of jacques derrida as a young jewish saint addresses these matters . through deconstruction , derrida employed the term logocentrism ( which was not his coinage ) . this is the concept that explains how language relies on a hierarchy system that values the spoken word over the written word in western culture . the idea of binary opposition is essential to cixous ' position on language . cixous and luce irigaray combined derrida 's logocentric idea and lacan 's symbol for desire , creating the term phallogocentrism . this term focuses on derrida 's social structure of speech and binary opposition as the center of reference for language , with the phallic being privileged and how women are only defined by what they lack ; not a vs . b , but , rather a vs . ¬a ( not-a ) . in a dialogue between derrida and cixous , derrida said about cixous : '' helene 's texts are translated across the world , but they remain untranslatable . we are two french writers who cultivate a strange relationship , or a strangely familiar relationship with the french language – at once more translated and more untranslatable than many a french author . we are more rooted in the french language than those with ancestral roots in this culture and this land . '' . major works . the laugh of the medusa ( 1975 ) . cixous ' critical feminist essay '' the laugh of the medusa '' , originally written in french as le rire de la méduse in 1975 , was ( after she revised it ) translated into english by paula cohen and keith cohen in 1976 . it has become a seminal essay , particularly because it announces what cixous called écriture féminine , a distinctive mode of writing for women and by women . publications . published in english . . selected books . co-authored with jacques derrida . foreword by jacques derrida . . plays . '' the conquest of the school at madhubai , '' trans . carpenter , deborah . 1986 . '' the name of oedipus , '' trans . christiane makward & miller , judith . in : out of bounds : women 's theatre in french . ann arbor : university of michigan press . 1992 . '' the terrible but unfinished story of norodom sihanouk , king of cambodia , '' trans . juliet flower maccannell , judith pike , and lollie groth . university of nebraska press , 1994 . published in french . . criticism . l'exil de james joyce ou l'art du remplacement ( the exile of james joyce , or the art of displacement ) . 1969 ( 1985 ) . . books . . . theater . la pupulle , cahiers renaud-barrault , gallimard , 1971 . portrait de dora , des femmes , 1976 . le nom d'oedipe . chant du corps interdit , des femmes , 1978 . la prise de l'école de madhubaï , avant-scène du théâtre , 1984 . l'histoire terrible mais inachevée de norodom sihanouk , roi du cambodge , théâtre du soleil , 1985 . théâtre , des femmes , 1986 . l'indiade , ou l'inde de leurs rêves , théâtre du soleil , 1987 . on ne part pas , on ne revient pas , des femmes , 1991 . les euménides d'eschyle ( traduction ) , théâtre du soleil , 1992 . l'histoire ( qu'on ne connaîtra jamais ) , des femmes , 1994 . '' voile noire voile blanche / black sail white sail '' , bilingual , trad . catherine a.f . macgillivray , new literary history 25 , 2 ( spring ) , minnesota university press , 1994 . la ville parjure ou le réveil des érinyes , théâtre du soleil , 1994 . jokasta , libretto to the opera of ruth schönthal , 1997 . tambours sur la digue , théâtre du soleil , 1999 . rouen , la trentième nuit de mai '31 , galilée , 2001 . le dernier caravansérail , théâtre du soleil , 2003 . les naufragés du fol espoir , théâtre du soleil , 2010 . selected essays . l'exil de james joyce ou l'art du remplacement ( doctoral thesis ) , grasset , 1969 . prénoms de personne , le seuil , 1974 . the exile of james joyce or the art of replacement ( translation by sally purcell of l'exil de james joyce ou l'art du remplacement ) . new york : david lewis , 1980 . un k . incompréhensible : pierre goldman , christian bourgois , 1975 . la jeune née , with catherine clément , 10/18 , 1975 . la venue à l'écriture , with madeleine gagnon and annie leclerc , 10/18 , 1977 . entre l'écriture , des femmes , 1986 . l'heure de clarice lispector , des femmes , 1989 . photos de racines , with mireille calle-gruber , des femmes , 1994 . lettre à zohra drif , 1998 portrait de jacques derrida en jeune saint juif , galilée , 2001 . rencontre terrestre , with frédéric-yves jeannet , galilée , 2005 . le tablier de simon hantaï , 2005 . insister . à jacques derrida , galilée , 2006 . le voisin de zéro : sam beckett , galilée , 2007 défions l'augure ( on the quote 'we defy augury ' from hamlet ) , galilée , 2018 . see also . antinarcissism list of deconstructionists jean-louis de rambures , '' comment travaillent les écrivains '' , paris 1978 ( interview with h . cixous ) phallic monism . references . further reading . . external links . '' the laugh of the medusa '' , by hélène cixous , translated into english by keith cohen and paula cohen approach the notion of affinity through a discussion of '' disruptive kinship , '' co-sponsored by villa gillet and the school of writing at the new school for public engagement . julie jaskin : an introduction to cixous mary jane parrine : stanford presidential lectures ' cixous page carola hilfrich : hélène cixous biography at jewish women : a comprehensive historical encyclopedia stanford presidential lectures and symposia in the humanities and arts