Boy Scouts of America v. Dale

background . the boy scouts of america is a private , non-profit organization engaged in instilling its system of values in young people . at the time of the case , it asserted that homosexuality was inconsistent with those values . when dale was a student at rutgers university , he became co-president of the lesbian/gay student alliance . in july 1990 , he attended a seminar on the health needs of lesbian and gay teenagers , where he was interviewed . an account of the interview was published in a local newspaper in which dale was quoted as coming out . bsa officials read the interview and expelled dale from his position as assistant scoutmaster of a new jersey troop . boy scouts of america v . dale , 530 u.s . 640 , 697 ( 2000 ) dale , an eagle scout , filed suit in the new jersey superior court , alleging , among other things , that the boy scouts had violated the state statute prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in places of public accommodation . n.j . stat . ann . 10:5–4 , 10:5–5 ( 2000 ) . the new jersey supreme court ruled against the boy scouts , saying that they violated the state 's public accommodations law by revoking dale 's membership based on his homosexuality . among other rulings , the court ( 1 ) held that application of that law did not violate the boy scouts ' first amendment right of expressive association because dale 's inclusion would not significantly affect members ' ability to carry out their purposes ; ( 2 ) determined that new jersey has a compelling interest in eliminating the destructive consequences of discrimination from society , and that its public accommodations law abridges no more speech than is necessary to accomplish its purpose ; and ( 3 ) held that dale 's reinstatement did not compel the boy scouts to express any message . the boy scouts appealed to the united states supreme court , which granted certiorari to determine whether the application of new jersey 's public accommodations law violated the first amendment . counsel . image : evan wolfson by david shankbone.jpg 150px thumb evan wolfson , attorney for james dale dale was represented by evan wolfson , an attorney and noted lgbt rights advocate . wolfson has also worked on a number of high-profile cases seeking legal recognition of same-sex marriages . baehr v . miike also representing dale on a pro bono basis was the new york-based law firm cleary gottlieb steen & hamilton . the boy scouts of america were represented by attorney george davidson , a partner in the new york-based law firm hughes hubbard & reed . davidson is a former president of the legal aid society and chair of the federal defenders of new york . decision . the supreme court decided 5–4 for the bsa on june 28 , 2000 . majority opinion . image : william rehnquist.jpg left 175px thumb chief justice william rehnquist chief justice william rehnquist 's majority opinion relied upon roberts v . united states jaycees , 468 u.s . 609 , 622 ( 1984 ) , in which the supreme court said : '' consequently , we have long understood as implicit in the right to engage in activities protected by the first amendment a corresponding right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political , social , economic , educational , religious , and cultural ends . '' this right , the roberts decision continues , is crucial in preventing the majority from imposing its views on groups that would rather express other , perhaps unpopular , ideas . government actions that may unconstitutionally burden this freedom may take many forms , one of which is '' intrusion into the internal structure or affairs of an association '' like a '' regulation that forces the group to accept members it does not desire '' . forcing a group to accept certain members may impair the ability of the group to express those views , and only those views , that it intends to express . thus , '' freedom of association . plainly presupposes a freedom not to associate . '' however , to determine whether a group is protected by the first amendment 's expressive associational right , it must first be determined whether the group engages in '' expressive association . '' after reviewing the scout oath and scout law the court decided that the general mission of the boy scouts is clear—it is '' to instill values in young people '' . 530 u.s . at 650 . the boy scouts seek to instill these values by having its adult leaders spend time with the youth members , instructing and engaging them in activities like camping , fishing , etc . during the time spent with the youth members , the scoutmasters and assistant scoutmasters inculcate them with the boy scouts ' values—both expressly and by example . an association that seeks to transmit such a system of values engages in expressive activity . first , associations do not have to associate for the '' purpose '' of disseminating a certain message in order to be entitled to the protections of the first amendment . an association must merely engage in expressive activity that could be impaired in order to be entitled to protection . second , even if the boy scouts discourages scout leaders from disseminating views on sexual issues , the first amendment protects the boy scouts ' method of expression . if the boy scouts wishes scout leaders to avoid questions of sexuality and teach only by example , this fact does not negate the sincerity of its belief discussed above . regarding whether the boy scouts as a whole had an expressive policy against homosexuality , the court gave deference to the organization 's own assertions of the nature of its expressions , as well as what would impair them . the boy scouts asserts that it '' teaches that homosexual conduct is not morally straight '' , and that it does '' not want to promote homosexual conduct as a legitimate form of behavior '' . 530 u.s . at 653 . while the policy may not represent the views of all boy scouts , the first amendment '' does not require that every member of a group agree on every issue in order for the group 's policy to be expressive association . '' 530 u.s . at 655 . the court deemed it sufficient that the boy scouts had taken an official position with respect to same-sex relationships . the presence of an openly gay activist in an assistant scoutmaster 's uniform sends a distinctly different message from the presence of a heterosexual assistant scoutmaster who is on record as disagreeing with boy scouts policy . the boy scouts has a first amendment right to choose to send one message but not the other . the fact that the organization does not trumpet its views from the housetops , or that it tolerates dissent within its ranks , does not mean that its views receive no first amendment protection . 530 u.s . at 655–56 . the decision concluded : . dissenting opinion . image : john paul stevens , scotus photo portrait.jpg 175px thumb justice john paul stevens justice stevens wrote a dissent in which justices souter , ginsburg , and breyer joined . 530 u.s . at 663 . he observed that '' every state law prohibiting discrimination is designed to replace prejudice with principle . '' 530 u.s . at 664 . louis brandeis had observed in his dissent from new state ice co . v . liebmann ( 1932 ) that it '' is one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous state may , if its citizens choose , serve as a laboratory ; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country '' . in stevens ' opinion , the court 's decision interfered with new jersey 's experiment . stevens ' first point was that the boy scouts ' ban on gay members did not follow from its founding principles . the boy scouts sought to instill '' values '' in young people , '' to prepare them to make ethical choices over their lifetime in achieving their full potential '' . 530 u.s . at 666 . the scout oath and the scout law , which set forth the scouts ' central tenets , assist in this goal . one of these tenets is that a scout is '' morally straight '' . another is that a scout is '' clean '' . as these terms were defined in the scout handbook , stevens said , '' it is plain as the light of day that neither one of these principles—'morally straight ' and 'clean'—says the slightest thing about homosexuality . indeed , neither term in the boy scouts ' law and oath expresses any position whatsoever on sexual matters . '' 530 u.s . at 668–69 . what guidance the boy scouts gave to the adult leaders that have direct contact with the scouts themselves urged those leaders to avoid discussing sexual matters . '' scouts . are directed to receive their sex education at home or in school , but not from the organization . '' scoutmasters , in turn , are told to direct '' curious adolescents '' to their family , religious leaders , doctors , or other professionals . the boy scouts had gone so far as to devise specific guidelines for scoutmasters : do not advise scouts about sexual matters , because it is outside the expertise and comfort level of most scoutmasters . if a scout brings specific questions to his scoutmaster , the scoutmaster should answer within his comfort level , remembering that a '' boy who appears to be asking about sexual intercourse . may really only be worried about pimples '' . boys with '' sexual problems '' should be referred to an appropriate professional . 530 u.s . at 669–70 . stevens ended his dissent by noting that serious and '' ancient '' homophobia could be aggravated by the '' creation of a constitutional shield '' . 530 u.s . at 699–700 .