Persona

etymology . the latin word probably derived from the etruscan word '' phersu '' , with the same meaning , and that from the greek prosopon . its meaning in the latter roman period changed to indicate a '' character '' of a theatrical performance or court of law , when it became apparent that different individuals could assume the same role and that legal attributes such as rights , powers , and duties followed the role . the same individuals as actors could play different roles , each with its own legal attributes , sometimes even in the same court appearance . according to other sources , which also admit that the origin of the term is not completely clear , persona could be related to the latin verb per-sonare , literally : sounding through , with an obvious link to the above-mentioned theatrical mask , which often incorporated a small megaphone . in literature . in literature the term generally refers to a character established by an author , one in whose voice all or part of a narrative takes place . poets such as robert browning , ezra pound , and t . s . eliot are strongly associated with such narrative voices , as is the writer luigi pirandello . these writers understood the term slightly differently and derived its use and meaning from different traditions . examples of eliot 's personae were prufrock and sweeney . pound developed such characters as cino , bertran de born , propertius , and mauberley in response to figures in browning ’ s dramatic monologues . whereas eliot used '' masks '' to distance himself from aspects of modern life which he found degrading and repulsive , pound 's personae were often poets and could be considered in good part alter-egos . for pound , the personae were a way of working through a specific poetic problem . in this sense , the persona is a transparent mask , wearing the traits of two poets and responding to two situations , old and new , which are similar and overlapping . in literary analysis , any narrative voice that speaks in the first person and appears to define a particular character is often referred to as a persona . it is contrasted with a third-person narrative voice , generally taken to be more objective and impersonal . there are borderline cases , such as the “ we ” that occurs late in edwin arlington robinson ’ s poem and functions something like a chorus in a greek tragedy , but in general any identifiable narrator whose point of view or manner of speaking clearly distinguishes him or her from the author is considered a literary persona . in music . usually the performers assume a role that matches the music they sing on stage , though they may also be composers . many performers make use of a persona . some artists create various characters , especially if their career is long and they go through many changes over time . for example , david bowie initially adopted a role as alien messenger ziggy stardust , and later as the thin white duke . james e . perone , the words and music of david bowie ( greenwood publishing group , 2007 ) , ppp . 39 , 51 , and 108 . more than just artistic pseudonyms , the personae are independent characters used in the artist 's shows and albums ( in this example , the rise and fall of ziggy stardust and the spiders from mars and station to station ) . however , in music , a persona does not always mean a change . some authors have noted that bob dylan 's charisma is due largely to his almost stereotyped image , always with a harmonica , guitar , and with his distinctive hair , nasal voice , and clothing . paul williams , bob dylan : performing artist 1986-1990 & beyond : mind out of time ( omnibus press , 2004 ) , p.229 . the persona also serves to claim a right or to draw attention to a certain subject . that is the case of marilyn manson and his interest in death and morbidity , and madonna and her interest in sexuality . bhesham r . sharma , the death of art ( university press of america , 2006 ) , p.14 . the concept of persona in music was introduced by edward t . cone in his the composer 's voice ( 1974 ) , that dealt with the relation between the lyrical self of a song 's lyrics and its composer . deborah stein and robert spillman , poetry into song : performance and analysis of lieder ( oxford university press us , 2010 ) , p.235 . the concept of persona can be used to refer also to an instrumentalist , like a pianist and his playing style , deborah stein and robert spillman , p.106 . although the term is more commonly used to refer to the voice and performance nuances of a vocalist in a studio album or in a live concert . examples include maria bethânia , elis regina , edith piaf , nina simone , and also mick jagger of the rolling stones , who takes the guise of satan in the song '' sympathy for the devil '' or of a housewife in '' slave '' . sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band by the beatles , presents a group persona , kenneth womack and todd f . davis , reading the beatles : cultural studies , literary criticism , and the fab four ( suny press , 2006 ) , p.21 . including the character billy shears '' played by '' drummer ringo starr . allan f . moore , the beatles , sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band ( cambridge university press , 1997 ) , p.75 . artists such as lady gaga , nicki minaj , and beyoncé popularized the use of personae in the performance of pop music . jo calderone , the persona of lady gaga , performed at the 2011 mtv video music awards . jo represents a drag male persona , and is often used in the performance of her song , '' you and i '' . nicki minaj , a bubblegum rapper , employs multiple personae , ranging from what she calls the harajuku barbie persona to roman zolanski , a polish homosexual . the personae were heavily used in her sophomoric album , pink friday : roman reloaded . the persona of beyoncé knowles , '' sasha fierce '' , appears on the album i am . sasha fierce . according to beyoncé , sasha is her wilder side , emerging during high octane stage performances and serving as a sort of scapegoat for '' unladylike '' behavior . . in psychology . according to carl jung and the jungian psychology , the persona is also the mask or appearance one presents to the world . it may appear in dreams under various guises . people may choose to wear a social mask or '' persona '' to make themselves appear more socially desirable . this is used to impress potential partners or to make new friends . people can have multiple personas that they use in various situations ; this can include work ; being with friends ; at home ; ; etc . depending on the individual 's circumstance , a persona which they consider stronger within their specific social situation can be created because they put a higher emphasis on social interactions . however carl jung warns about using personas too much fearing that one might lose their own individuality to their persona . a study has shown that this can be true to an extent , when taking a private self-rating test there is a high correlation between how a person rates themselves and how they present themselves in public , but it is hard to tell if people are accurately filling out the test or answering what they find desirable . in a study written by danielle jackson she claims that a persons persona can range in healthiness , the more healthy a persona is the more socially acceptable and consistent that person is . however once a person starts to believe that they are their persona it can have adverse affects on their personality . . in marketing . personas are used in marketing ( and advertising ) by creating a marketing persona that represents a group or segment of customers so that the company can focus its efforts . for example , online advertising agencies can monitor pictures , browsing history and the ads people surfing the internet generally select or choose to click , and based on that data they tailor their merchandise to a targeted audience or better describe a customer segments using a data driven approach . . in user experience design . personas are also used in user experience design , known as user personas . alan cooper introduced personas in his book , the inmates are running the asylum ( 1998 ) . cooper play-acted fictitious characters in order to help solve design questions . alan cooper : '' the origin of personas '' . cooper journal , may 15 , 2008 . these personas need to be based on user research and can also be described in narrative form . kim goodwin : '' getting from research to personas : harnessing the power of data '' . cooper journal , may 15 , 2008 . creating personas has become synonymous with creating a document , known as persona profile , instead of an '' activity of empathetic role-play '' . andrew hinton : '' personas and the role of design documentation . '' boxes and arrow , february 27th , 2008 . . see also . alter ego dissociative identity disorder character mask costume doppelgänger stage name pseudonym pen name rebirth/reincarnation . citations .