Menachem Mendel Schneersohn

biography . menachem mendel schneersohn was born in liozna , on september 9 , 1789 . his mother devorah leah died just three years later , and her father rabbi shneur zalman of liadi raised him as his own son . he married his first cousin chaya mushka schneersohn , daughter of rabbi dovber schneuri . after his father-in-law/uncle 's death , and a three-year interregnum during which he tried to persuade the hasidim to accept his brother-in-law menachem-nachum schneuri or his uncle chaim-avraham as their leader , he assumed the leadership of lubavitch on the eve of shavuot 5591 ( may 5 , 1831 os ) . he was known as the tzemach tzedek after the title of a voluminous compendium of halakha ( jewish law ) that he authored . '' tzemach '' ( צמח ) has the same gematria as '' menachem '' ( מנחם ) , and '' tzedek '' ( צדק ) has the same as '' mendel '' ( מענדל ) . the original responsa tzemach tzedek were those of menachem mendel krochmal . schneersohn 's responsa are known as shu '' t tzemach tzedek hachadashot , '' the new tzemach tzedek responsa '' . rabbi menachem mendil hager , the first viznhitzer rebbe , called his commentary on the torah tzemach tzadik ( צמח צדיק ) , because he spelled his name with an extra yod ( מענדיל ) . he also authored derech mitzvotecha ( '' way of your commandments '' ) , a mystical exposition of the mitzvos . he compiled major works of rabbi shneur zalman of liadi for publication , including the siddur l'kol ha'shanah ( commonly known as siddur im dach ) , likutei torah/torah or . he also authored a philosophical text entitled '' sefer chakira : derech emuna '' ( book of philosophy : the way of faith ) . the tzemach tzedek enjoyed close ties with other jewish leaders . in the course of his battle against the haskalah in russia , he forged a close alliance with rabbi yitzchak of valozhyn , a major leader of the misnagdim , which led to warmer relations between them and the hasidim . the tzemach tzedek and the haskalah movement , official chabad history . according to baruch epstein , his father rabbi yechiel michel epstein spent six months under the tzemach tzedek 's tutelage , and learned most of his mystical knowledge during that time . this story is disputed by hassidic historian yehoshua mondshine . the claim is in mekor baruch , chapter 20 . but see mekor baruch - mekor hakzavim by yehoshua mondshein . historian eitam henkin suggests that rabbi y . m . epstein did meet with the tzemach tzedek , but only a few visits over a week or two , noting the testimony of rabbi yehuda leib maimon that he heard about this directly from his teacher . his close friendship with professor j berstenson , the czar 's court physician , often helped the delicate negotiations relating to the welfare of the community . encyclopedia of hasidism , entry : schneersohn , menachem mendel . naftali lowenthal . aronson , london 1996 . he set up an organisation called hevras techiyas hameisim to assist jewish boy-soldiers who were being recruited and converted to christianity by the russian army . these soldiers known as cantonists were taken away from the jewish community to other villages . schneersohn arranged for his students to pay them regular visits to keep up their spirits and discourage them from converting . in 1844–45 he took steps to increase the enrollment and viability of the lubavitch yeshivas in dubroŭna , pasana , lyozno and kalisz , expanding their enrollment to around 600 students in total . repeated attempts by the authorities to entrap him using informers such as hershel hodesh , benjamin the apostate and lipman feldman failed . sefer hatoldos rav yosef yitzchak schneersohn milubavitch , glitzenstein , a . h . . death and legacy . he died in lubavitch on march 17 , 1866 at the age of 76 , leaving behind him seven sons and two daughters . he was succeeded by his youngest son , shmuel as the rebbe of lubavitch , while three of his other sons formed breakaways of the chabad movement which continue to some extent even today . several of his sons established chasidic dynasties . ( see sons . ) . famous quote . a famous saying of the tzemach tzedek is think good and it will be good ( original yiddish : trakht gut vet zein gut ) . this expresses the view that simply by virtue of a person 's trust in god , that person 's prayer may be answered . sons . the tzemach tzedek had seven sons : the introduction to hayom yom , by rabbi menachem mendel schneerson . 1 . rabbi baruch shalom ( 1805–1869 ) did not become a rebbe in his own right ; he chose to remain in lubavitch and become a chasid of his youngest brother . rabbi menachem mendel schneerson , the seventh rebbe of chabad-lubavitch , was his great-great-grandson . 2 . rabbi yehuda leib schneersohn ( maharil ) ( 1808–1866 ) settled in kopys a few months after the death of his father , where he founded the kopust branch of chabad . he died two months later . he had three sons : rabbi shlomo zalman schneersohn ( 1830–1900 ) , oldest son of rabbi yehuda leib , assumed his father 's position in kopust . he is the author of a work on hasidism titled '' magen avot '' ( '' shield of the fathers '' ) . rabbi shalom dovber schneersohn of rechitsa ( d . 1908 ) , known as the rashab of rechitsa . a hebrew acronym for '' r av sh alom b er '' succeeding his brother , rabbi shlomo zalman , rabbi shalom dovber served as the kopuster movement 's rebbe in the town of rechytsa . kaminetzky , yosef . y . days in chabad . kehot publication society . brooklyn , ny . ( 2005 ) : p . 21 . rabbi shalom dovber seems to have died without a successor . rabbi shmaryahu noah schneersohn ( 1842–1924 ) , known as shmaryahu noah of babruysk . succeeding his brother , rabbi shlomo zalman , rabbi shmaryahu noah served as the kopuster movement 's rebbe in the town of babruysk . kaminetzky , yosef . y . days in chabad . kehot publication society . brooklyn , ny . ( 2005 ) : p . 93 . he was rav of the chasidim in babruysk from 1872 , and founded a yeshiva there in 1901 . kaminetzky , yosef . y . days in chabad . kehot publication society . brooklyn , ny . ( 2005 ) : p . 92-93 . he authored a two volume work on hasidism , titled '' shemen lamaor '' ( '' light for the luminary '' ) . lowenthal , naftali . schneersohn , shmaryahu noah . encyclopedia of hasidism , jason aronson publishers . london . 1996 . schneerson , shmaryahu noah . shemen la'moar . vol . 1 . kfar chabad , israel . ( 1964 ) : p . 1 . available at hebrewbooks.org schneerson , shmaryahu noah . shemen la'moar . vol . 2 . kfar chabad , israel . ( 1967 ) : p . 1 . available at hebrewbooks.org 3 . rabbi chaim schneur zalman ( 1814–1880 ) was rebbe in lyady after his father , the tzemach tzedek died . he founded the liadi branch of chabad . he was succeeded by his son , rabbi yitzchak dovber ( 1835–1910 ) of liadi , author of siddur maharid , and his son-in-law , rabbi levi yitzchak ( d . 1905 ) of siratin , a scion of the rebbe of radzimin . 4 . rabbi yisroel noach ( 1815–1883 ) of nizhyn founded the niezhin branch of chabad . although officially a rebbe , he had only a small following . he had no successor . his son was rabbi avraham schneerson of kischinev , whose daughter , nechama dina schneersohn , married rabbi yosef yitzchak schneersohn , the sixth rebbe of chabad-lubavitch . 5 . rabbi yosef yitzchak ( 1822–1876 ) was a rebbe in ovruch . he founded the avrutch branch of chabad . he was compelled to assume this position by his father-in-law , rabbi yaakov yisroel of cherkas ( son of rabbi mordechai twersky and son-in-law of dovber schneuri ) against his father 's wishes . he was the maternal grandfather and namesake of rabbi yosef yitzchak schneersohn , the sixth rebbe of chabad-lubavitch . 6 . rabbi yaakov , although leaving descendants , died at quite a young age . he lived in orsha . little is known about him . 7 . rabbi shmuel schneersohn ( maharash ) ( 1834–1882 ) of lubavitch , his youngest son , succeeded him as the rebbe of lubavitch . . ohr hatorah . rabbi menachem mendel schneerson said of the tzemach tzedek 's work '' ohr hatorah '' that it contains all the previous and future teachings of the chabad rebbes . sefer hasichos 5752 , vol . 1 , p . 6 . noted students . rabbi hillel paritcher rabbi shneur zalman fradkin of lublin . works . ohr hatorah - chassidic discourses sefer halikkutim - a chassidic encyclopedia derech mitzvosecha - an explanation of the mystical reasons for the mitzvos parts of derech mitzvosecha in english translation : part one part two in hebrew '' tzemach tzedeck chiddushim al hashas '' commentary on the talmud responsa tzemach tzedek - 8 vols . chabadlibrary.org online edition in hebrew '' igros kodesh '' - a collection of about 100 surviving non-halachik responsa sefer chakira : derech emunah - exposition of jewish philosophy '' kitzurim v'haoros '' - scholarly glosses on the tanya . notes . external links . chabad.org : the tzemach tzedek jewish history : the influence of the tzemach tzedek the tzemach tzedek family tree