Norfolk Naval Shipyard

history . british control . the gosport shipyard was founded on november 1 , 1767 by andrew sprowle on the western shore of the elizabeth river in norfolk county in the virginia colony . this shipyard became a prosperous naval and merchant facility for the british crown . in 1775 , at the beginning of the american revolution , sprowle stayed loyal to the crown and fled virginia , which confiscated all of his properties , including the shipyard . in 1779 , while the newly formed commonwealth of virginia was operating the shipyard , it was burned by british troops . . american control . in 1794 , united states congress passed '' an act to provide a naval armament , '' allowing the federal government to lease the gosport shipyard from virginia . in 1799 the keel of , one of the first six frigates authorized by congress , was laid , making her the first ship built in gosport for the u.s . navy . the federal government purchased the shipyard from virginia in 1801 for 12,000 . this tract of land measured and now makes up the northeastern corner of the current shipyard . in 1827 , construction began on the first of what would be the first two dry docks in the united states . the first one was completed three weeks ahead of similar projects in both boston , massachusetts and south america , making it the first functional dry dock in the americas . dry dock one , as it is referred to today , is still operational and is listed as historical landmark in portsmouth , virginia . officer 's quarters a , b , and c were built about 1837 . additional land on the eastern side of the elizabeth river was purchased in 1845 . the shipyard and neighboring towns suffered from a severe yellow fever epidemic in 1855 , which killed about a quarter of the population , including james chisholm , whose account was published shortly after his death in the epidemic . enslaved labor . enslaved labor was extensively utilized in the norfolk navy yard from its foundation until the civil war . some idea of the human scale can be found in this excerpt from a letter of commodore lewis warrington dated 12 october 1831 to the board of navy commissioners ( bnc ) . sharp , john g . , commodore lewis warrington to the board of navy commissioners re : employment of enslaved workers in the construction of the dry docks 12 october 1831 warrington 's letter to the bnc was in response to various petitions by white workers to curtail or end enslaved labor on the dry dock . his letter attempts both to reassure the bnc in light of the recent nat turner rebellion which occurred on 22 august 1831 and to serve as a reply to the dry dock 's stonemasons who had quit their positions and accused the project chief engineer , loammi baldwin jr . , of the unfair hiring of enslaved labor in their stead . tomlins , christopher l . in nat turner ’ s shadow reflections on the norfolk dry dock affair 1830-1831 , labor history , vol 33 , fall 1992 , number 4 , p.498 . , accessed 19 september 2020 , christopher , in the matter of nat turner a speculative history , ( princeton university press : princeton,2020 ) , p.161 . there are about two hundred and forty six blacks employed in the yard and dock altogether ; of whom one hundred and thirty six are in the former and one hundred ten in the latter – we shall in the course of this day or tomorrow discharge twenty which will leave but one hundred and twenty six on our roll – the evil of employing blacks , if it be one , is in a fair and rapid course of diminution , as our whole number , after the timber now in the water is stowed , will not exceed sixty ; and those employed at the dock will be discharged from time to time , as their services can be dispensed with – when it is finished , there will be no occasion for the employment of any . sharp , john g . , commodore lewis warrington to the board of navy commissioners re : employment of enslaved workers in the construction of the dry docks 12 october 1831 accessed 19 september 2020 despite such promises , enslaved labor continued , and , as of october 1832 , baldwin reported of the 261 men employed on the dry dock , 78 of whom , were enslaved black laborers or 30 % of the dry dock workforce . tomlins , 2020 , p.164 . opposition to enslaved labor was never able to effectively challenge the status quo and suggestions or recommendations to end the practice met fierce resistance . one such effort in 1839 , was countered by a petition signed by 34 shipyard slaveholders , pleading with the secretary of the navy to continue it less they suffer economic harm . their successful petition was endorsed by commodore lewis warrington . warrington noted : '' i beg leave to state , that no slave employed in this yard , is owned by a commissioned officer , but that many are owned by the master mechanicks & workmen of the yard '' . he added ; “ i beg leave to state , that no slave is allowed to perform any mechanical work in the yard , all such being necessarily reserved for the whites ; this keeping up the proper distinction between the white men & slave ” . sharp , john g . , a norfolk navy yard slaveholders petition to the secretary of the navy , june 21 , 1839 norfolk navy yard 2019 retrieved 7 march 2019 in 1846 commodore jesse wilkerson felt the need to confirm the continuation of slave hiring to the secretary of the navy george bancroft , “ that a majority of them blacks are negro slaves , and that a large portion of those employed in the ordinary for many years , have been of that description , but by what authority i am unable to say as nothing can be found in the records of my office on the subject – these men have been examined by the surgeon of the yard and regularly shipped enlisted for twelve months '' sharp , john g . , list of gosport navy yard employees military and civilian , 1846 retrieved 25 april 2019 ( 1818–1883 ) as a young enslaved laborer and ship caulker worked at norfolk navy yard in the 1830s and 1840s and later wrote of this unrequited labor : '' the government had patronized , and given encouragement to slavery to a greater extent than the great majority of the country has been aware . it had in its service hundreds if not thousands of slaves employed on government works . '' god made man , man made the slave : the autobiography of george teamoh editors f.n . boney , richard l . hume and rafia zafar mercer university press : macon 1990 , p.83 . as late '' as 1848 almost one third of the 300 workers at the gosport ( norfolk ) navy yard were hired slaves . '' starobin , robert s . industrial slavery in the old south , oxford : oxford university press , 1975 p.32 . . american civil war . in 1861 , virginia joined the confederate states of america . fearing that the confederacy would take control of the facility , the shipyard commander charles stewart mccauley ordered the burning of the shipyard . the confederate forces did , in fact , take over the shipyard , and did so without armed conflict through an elaborate ruse orchestrated by civilian railroad builder william mahone ( then president of the norfolk and petersburg railroad and soon to become a famous confederate officer ) . he bluffed the federal troops into abandoning the shipyard in portsmouth by running a single passenger train into norfolk with great noise and whistle-blowing , then much more quietly , sending it back west , and then returning the same train again , creating the illusion of large numbers of arriving troops to the federals listening in portsmouth across the elizabeth river ( and just barely out of sight ) . the capture of the shipyard allowed a tremendous amount of war material to fall into confederate hands . 1,195 heavy guns were taken for the defense of the confederacy , and employed in many areas from hampton roads all the way to fort donelson tennessee , port hudson , and fort de russy , louisiana . the union forces withdrew to fort monroe across hampton roads , which was the only land in the area which remained under union control . in early 1862 , the confederate ironclad warship was rebuilt using the burned-out hulk of . in the haste to abandon the shipyard , merrimack had only been destroyed above the waterline , and an innovative armored superstructure was built upon the remaining portion . virginia , which was still called merrimack by union forces and in many historical accounts , sank , , and engaged the union ironclad in the famous battle of hampton roads during the union blockade of hampton roads . the confederates burned the shipyard again when they left in may 1862 . following its recapture of norfolk and portsmouth ( and the shipyard ) by the union forces , the name of the shipyard was changed to norfolk after the norfolk county , virginia , outside the city limits of portsmouth at the time . this choice of name was probably to minimize any confusion with the pre-existing portsmouth naval shipyard in kittery , maine near portsmouth , new hampshire . modern shipyard . from the reconstruction era until 1917 , the shipyard was used both for ship repair and construction and for ship stationing ; the current major naval base for the region , naval station norfolk , did not yet exist . as such , the then norfolk navy yard served as the official homeport for ships stationed in the hampton roads region . no major expansion occurred at the facility until world war i when it was expanded to accommodate 11,000 employees and their families . the shipyard was again expanded in world war ii , doubling its physical size , and greatly expanding its productive capacity . during its peak , from 1940 to 1945 , 43,000 personnel were employed and 6,850 vessels were repaired . after world war ii , the shipyard shifted from being a ship construction facility to an overhaul and repair facility . work on the , was suspended in 1950 . its last two ships , and her sister ship , , wooden minesweepers , were christened on march 28 , 1953 during the korean war . currently , the shipyard is composed of several noncontiguous areas totaling . norfolk naval shipyard provides repair and modernization services for every type of ship that the u.s . navy has in service , which includes amphibious vessels , submarines , guided-missile cruisers , and supercarriers , although in recent years the shipyard has primarily focused on nuclear ships and nuclear support ships . the norfolk yard is one of the few facilities on the east coast capable of dry docking nuclear aircraft carriers . another facility capable of drydocking such carriers is huntington ingalls industries ( hii ) , located on the other side of hampton roads in newport news , which is the only u.s . shipyard that currently builds and refuels nuclear aircraft carriers . notable ships . – 38 gun frigate , contemporary to , fought in the war of 1812 . – first ship to be dry docked in the western hemisphere . – first confederate ironclad warship , rebuilt from burned out hulk of ; participant in battle of hampton roads against – first u.s . naval battleship to be commissioned . – first modern cruiser completely built by the u.s . government . – first u.s . aircraft carrier ; converted from uss jupiter . – modernization completed in 1931 . – modernization completed in 1934 . – modernization completed in 1933 . – modernization completed in 1930 . – modernization completed in 1928 . – modernization completed in 1926 , survives as a museum ship in san jacinto , texas . – only u.s . aircraft carrier paid for solely by u.s . warbonds and subscriptions , launched 24 february 1944 . – built and launched 2 november 1944 . – built and launched 12 may 1945 . – built and launched 16 february 1942 . , longest naval ship in the world , and world 's first nuclear powered aircraft carrier . ( ship was built at newport news shipyard ) . museum . outside the facility on the nearby old town portsmouth waterfront is the portsmouth naval shipyard museum , which features displays and artifacts from its history . see also . rear admiral walter mclean , commander of the shipyard during world war i john h . burroughs , superintendent of the shipyard during the union occupation of the american civil war . references . external links .