Photomultiplier tube

structure and operating principles . photomultipliers are typically constructed with an evacuated glass housing ( using an extremely tight and durable glass-to-metal seal like other vacuum_tube ) , containing a photocathode , several dynodes , and an anode . incident photons strike the photocathode material , which is usually a thin vapor-deposited conducting layer on the inside of the entry window of the device . electrons are ejected from the surface as a consequence of the photoelectric effect . these electrons are directed by the focusing electrode toward the electron multiplier , where electrons are multiplied by the process of secondary emission . the electron multiplier consists of a number of electrodes called dynodes . each dynode is held at a more positive potential , by ≈100 volts , than the preceding one . a primary electron leaves the photocathode with the energy of the incoming photon , or about 3 & nbsp ; ev for '' blue '' photons , minus the work function of the photocathode . a small group of primary electrons is created by the arrival of a group of initial photons . ( in fig . 1 , the number of primary electrons in the initial group is proportional to the energy of the incident high energy gamma ray . ) the primary electrons move toward the first dynode because they are accelerated by the electric field . they each arrive with ≈100 & nbsp ; ev kinetic energy imparted by the potential difference . upon striking the first dynode , more low energy electrons are emitted , and these electrons are in turn accelerated toward the second dynode . the geometry of the dynode chain is such that a cascade occurs with an exponentially-increasing number of electrons being produced at each stage . for example , if at each stage an average of 5 new electrons are produced for each incoming electron , and if there are 12 dynode stages , then at the last stage one expects for each primary electron about 5 12 ≈ 10 8 electrons . this last stage is called the anode . this large number of electrons reaching the anode results in a sharp current pulse that is easily detectable , for example on an oscilloscope , signaling the arrival of the photon ( s ) at the photocathode ≈50 nanoseconds earlier . the necessary distribution of voltage along the series of dynodes is created by a voltage divider chain , as illustrated in fig . 2 . in the example , the photocathode is held at a negative high voltage of order 1000 v , while the anode is usage_considerations . the capacitors across the final few dynodes act as local reservoirs of charge to help maintain the voltage on the dynodes while electron avalanches propagate through the tube . many variations of design are used in practice ; the design shown is merely illustrative . there are two common photomultiplier orientations , the head-on or end-on ( transmission mode ) design , as shown above , where light enters the flat , circular top of the tube and passes the photocathode , and the side-on design ( reflection mode ) , where light enters at a particular spot on the side of the tube , and impacts on an opaque photocathode . the side-on design is used , for instance , in the type 931 , the first mass-produced pmt . besides the different photocathode materials , performance is also affected by the transmission of the window material that the light passes through , and by the arrangement of the dynodes . many photomultiplier models are available having various combinations of these , and other , design variables . the manufacturers manuals provide the information needed to choose an appropriate design for a particular application . history . the invention of the photomultiplier is predicated upon two prior achievements , the separate discoveries of the photoelectric effect and of secondary emission . photoelectric effect . the first demonstration of the photoelectric effect was carried out in 1887 by heinrich hertz using ultraviolet light . significant for practical applications , elster and geitel two years later demonstrated the same effect using visible light striking alkali metals ( potassium and sodium ) . the addition of caesium , another alkali metal , has permitted the range of sensitive wavelengths to be extended towards longer wavelengths in the red portion of the visible spectrum . historically , the photoelectric effect is associated with albert einstein , who relied upon the phenomenon to establish the fundamental principle of quantum mechanics in 1905 , an accomplishment for which einstein received the 1921 nobel prize . it is worthwhile to note that heinrich hertz , working 18 years earlier , had not recognized that the kinetic energy of the emitted electrons is proportional to the frequency but independent of the optical intensity . this fact implied a discrete nature of light , i.e . the existence of quanta , for the first time . secondary emission . the phenomenon of secondary emission ( the ability of electrons in a vacuum tube to cause the emission of additional electrons by striking an electrode ) was , at first , limited to purely electronic phenomena and devices ( which lacked photosensitivity ) . in 1899 the effect was first reported by villard . in 1902 , austin and starke reported that the metal surfaces impacted by electron beams emitted a larger number of electrons than were incident . h . bruining , physics and applications of secondary electron emission , ( mcgraw-hill book co . , inc . ; 1954 ) . the application of the newly discovered secondary emission to the amplification of signals was only proposed after world war i by westinghouse scientist joseph slepian in a 1919 patent . j . slepian , westinghouse electric , '' hot cathode tube '' , issued april 3 , 1923 ( filed 1919 ) . the race towards a practical electronic television camera . the ingredients for inventing the photomultiplier were coming together during the 1920s as the pace of vacuum tube technology accelerated . the primary goal for many , if not most , workers was the need for a practical television camera technology . television had been pursued with primitive prototypes for decades prior to the 1934 introduction of the first practical camera ( the iconoscope ) . early prototype television cameras lacked sensitivity . photomultiplier technology was pursued to enable television camera tubes , such as the iconoscope and ( later ) the orthicon , to be sensitive enough to be practical . so the stage was set to combine the dual phenomena of photoemission ( i.e . , the photoelectric effect ) with secondary emission , both of which had already been studied and adequately understood , to create a practical photomultiplier . first photomultiplier , single-stage ( early 1934 ) . the first documented photomultiplier demonstration dates to the early 1934 accomplishments of an rca group based in harrison , nj . harley iams and bernard salzberg were the first to integrate a photoelectric-effect cathode and single secondary emission amplification stage in a single vacuum envelope and the first to characterize its performance as a photomultiplier with electron amplification gain . these accomplishments were finalized prior to june 1934 as detailed in the manuscript submitted to proceedings of the institute of radio engineers ( proc . ire ) . the device consisted of a semi-cylindrical photocathode , a secondary emitter mounted on the axis , and a collector grid surrounding the secondary emitter . the tube had a gain of about eight and operated at frequencies well above 10 & nbsp ; khz . magnetic photomultipliers ( mid 1934–1937 ) . higher gains were sought than those available from the early single-stage photomultipliers . however , it is an empirical fact that the yield of secondary electrons is limited in any given secondary emission process , regardless of acceleration voltage . thus , any single-stage photomultiplier is limited in gain . at the time the maximum first-stage gain that could be achieved was approximately 10 ( very significant developments in the 1960s permitted gains above 25 to be reached using negative electron affinity dynodes ) . for this reason , multiple-stage photomultipliers , in which the photoelectron yield could be multiplied successively in several stages , were an important goal . the challenge was to cause the photoelectrons to impinge on successively higher-voltage electrodes rather than to travel directly to the highest voltage electrode . initially this challenge was overcome by using strong magnetic fields to bend the electrons ' trajectories . such a scheme had earlier been conceived by inventor j . slepian by 1919 ( see above ) . accordingly , leading international research organizations turned their attention towards improving photomultiplers to achieve higher gain with multiple stages . in the ussr , rca-manufactured radio equipment was introduced on a large scale by joseph stalin to construct broadcast networks , and the newly formed all-union scientific research institute for television was gearing up a research program in vacuum tubes that was advanced for its time and place . numerous visits were made by rca scientific personnel to the ussr in the 1930s , prior to the cold war , to instruct the soviet customers on the capabilities of rca equipment and to investigate customer needs . a.b . magoun adding sight to sound in stalin ’ s russia : rca and the transfer of television technology to the soviet union , society for the history of technology ( shot ) , amsterdam ( 2004 ) during one of these visits , in september 1934 , rca 's vladimir zworykin was shown the first multiple-dynode photomultiplier , or photoelectron multiplier . this pioneering device was proposed by leonid a . kubetsky in 1930 which he subsequently built in 1934 . the device achieved gains of 1000x or more when demonstrated in june 1934 . the work was submitted for print publication only two years later , in july 1936 as emphasized in a recent 2006 publication of the russian academy of sciences ( ras ) , which terms it '' kubetsky 's tube . '' the soviet device used a magnetic field to confine the secondary electrons and relied on the ag-o-cs photocathode which had been demonstrated by general electric in the 1920s . by october 1935 , zworykin , george ashmun morton , and louis malter of rca in camden , nj submitted their manuscript describing the first comprehensive experimental and theoretical analysis of a multiple dynode tube — the device later called a photomultiplier — to proc . ire . the rca prototype photomultipliers also used an ag-o-cs ( silver oxide-caesium ) photocathode . they exhibited a peak quantum efficiency of 0.4 % at 800 nm . electrostatic photomultipliers ( 1937–present ) . whereas these early photomultipliers used the magnetic field principle , electrostatic photomultipliers ( with no magnetic field ) were demonstrated by jan rajchman of rca laboratories in princeton , nj in the late 1930s and became the standard for all future commercial photomultipliers . the first mass-produced photomultiplier , the type 931 , was of this design and is still commercially produced today . j . rajchman and e.w . pike , rca technical report tr-362 , '' electrostatic focusing in secondary emission multipliers , '' september 9 , 1937 . improved photocathodes . also in 1936 , a much improved photocathode , cs 3 sb ( caesium-antimony ) , was reported by p . görlich . the caesium-antimony photocathode had a dramatically improved quantum efficiency of 12 % at 400 & nbsp ; nm , and was used in the first commercially successful photomultipliers manufactured by rca ( i.e . , the 931-type ) both as a photocathode and as a secondary-emitting material for the dynodes . different photocathodes provided differing spectral responses . spectral response of photocathodes . in the early 1940s , the jedec ( joint electron device engineering council ) , an industry committee on standardization , developed a system of designating spectral responses . '' relative spectral response data for photosensitive devices ( '' s '' curves ) , '' jedec publication no . 50 , electronic industries association , engineering department , 2001 i street , n.w . , washington , d.c . 20006 ( 1964 ) the philosophy included the idea that the product 's user need only be concerned about the response of the device rather than how the device may be fabricated . various combinations of photocathode and window materials were assigned '' s-numbers '' ( spectral numbers ) ranging from s-1 through s-40 , which are still in use today . for example , s-11 uses the caesium-antimony photocathode with a lime glass window , s-13 uses the same photocathode with a fused silica window , and s-25 uses a so-called '' multialkali '' photocathode ( na-k-sb-cs , or sodium-potassium-antimony-caesium ) that provides extended response in the red portion of the visible light spectrum . no suitable photoemissive surfaces have yet been reported to detect wavelengths longer than approximately 1700 nanometers , which can be approached by a special ( inp/ingaas ( cs ) ) photocathode . p . 34 , table 4-1 : typical spectral response characteristics , transmission mode photocathodes . rca corporation . for decades , rca was responsible for performing the most important work in developing and refining photomultipliers . rca was also largely responsible for the commercialization of photomultiplers . the company compiled and published an authoritative and widely used photomultiplier handbook . rca provided printed copies free upon request . the handbook , which continues to be made available online at no cost by the successors to rca , is considered to be an essential reference . following a corporate break-up in the late 1980s involving the acquisition of rca by general electric and disposition of the divisions of rca to numerous third parties , rca 's photomultiplier business became an independent company . lancaster , pennsylvania facility . the lancaster , pennsylvania facility was opened by the u.s . navy in 1942 and operated by rca for the manufacture of radio and microwave tubes . following world war ii , the naval facility was acquired by rca . rca lancaster , as it became known , was the base for the development and the production of commercial television products . in subsequent years other products were added , such as cathode ray tubes , photomultiplier tubes , motion-sensing light control switches , and closed-circuit television systems . burle industries . burle industries , as a successor to the rca corporation , carried the rca photomultiplier business forward after 1986 , based in the lancaster , pennsylvania facility . the 1986 acquisition of rca by general electric resulted in the divestiture of the rca lancaster new products division . hence , 45 years after being founded by the u.s . navy , its management team , led by erich burlefinger , purchased the division and in 1987 founded burle industries . in 2005 , after eighteen years as an independent enterprise , burle industries and a key subsidiary were acquired by photonis , a european holding company photonis group . following the acquisition , photonis was composed of photonis netherlands , photonis france , photonis usa , and burle industries . photonis usa operates the former galileo corporation scientific detector products group ( sturbridge , massachusetts ) , which had been purchased by burle industries in 1999 . the group is known for microchannel plate detector ( mcp ) electron multipliers—an integrated micro-vacuum tube version of photomultipliers . mcps are used for imaging and scientific applications , including night vision devices . on 9 march 2009 , photonis announced that it would cease all production of photomultipliers at both the lancaster , pennsylvania and the brive , france plants . photonis will stop its photomultiplier activity . hamamatsu . the japan-based company hamamatsu photonics ( also known as hamamatsu ) has emerged since the 1950s as a leader in the photomultiplier industry . hamamatsu , in the tradition of rca , has published its own handbook , which is available without cost on the company 's website . hamamatsu uses different designations for particular photocathode formulations and introduces modifications to these designations based on hamamatsu 's proprietary research and development . photocathode materials . the photocathodes can be made of a variety of materials , with different properties . typically the materials have low work function and are therefore prone to thermionic emission , causing noise and dark current , especially the materials sensitive in infrared ; cooling the photocathode lowers this thermal noise . the most common photocathode materials are photomultiplier tubes . construction and operating characteristics . connections to external circuits , hamamatsu ag-o-cs ( also called s1 ) transmission-mode , sensitive from 300–1200 & nbsp ; nm . high dark current ; used mainly in near-infrared , with the photocathode cooled ; gaas : cs , caesium-activated gallium arsenide , flat response from 300 to 850 & nbsp ; nm , fading towards ultraviolet and to 930 & nbsp ; nm ; ingaas : cs , caesium-activated indium gallium arsenide , higher infrared sensitivity than gaas : cs , between 900–1000 & nbsp ; nm much higher signal-to-noise ratio than ag-o-cs ; sb-cs , ( also called s11 ) caesium-activated antimony , used for reflective mode photocathodes ; response range from ultraviolet to visible , widely used ; bialkali ( sb-k-cs , sb-rb-cs ) , caesium-activated antimony-rubidium or antimony-potassium alloy , similar to sb : cs , with higher sensitivity and lower noise . can be used for transmission-mode ; favorable response to a nai : tl scintillator flashes makes them widely used in gamma spectroscopy and radiation detection ; high-temperature bialkali ( na-k-sb ) , can operate up to 175 & nbsp ; °c , used in well logging , low dark current at room temperature ; multialkali ( na-k-sb-cs ) , ( also called s20 ) , wide spectral response from ultraviolet to near-infrared , special cathode processing can extend range to 930 & nbsp ; nm , used in broadband spectrophotometers ; solar-blind ( cs-te , cs-i ) , sensitive to vacuum-uv and ultraviolet , insensitive to visible light and infrared ( cs-te has cutoff at 320 & nbsp ; nm , cs-i at 200 & nbsp ; nm ) . window materials . the windows of the photomultipliers act as wavelength filters ; this may be irrelevant if the cutoff wavelengths are outside of the application range or outside of the photocathode sensitivity range , but special care has to be taken for uncommon wavelengths . borosilicate glass is commonly used for near-infrared to about 300 & nbsp ; nm . high borate borosilicate glasses exist also in high uv transmission versions with high transmission also at 254 nm . glass with very low content of potassium can be used with bialkali photocathodes to lower the background radiation from the potassium-40 isotope . ultraviolet glass transmits visible and ultraviolet down to 185 & nbsp ; nm . used in spectroscopy . synthetic silica transmits down to 160 & nbsp ; nm , absorbs less uv than fused silica . different thermal expansion than kovar ( and than borosilicate glass that 's expansion-matched to kovar ) , a graded seal needed between the window and the rest of the tube . the seal is vulnerable to mechanical shocks . magnesium fluoride transmits ultraviolet down to 115 & nbsp ; nm . hygroscopic , though less than other alkali halides usable for uv windows . usage considerations . photomultiplier tubes typically utilize 1000 to 2000 volts to accelerate electrons within the chain of dynodes . ( see figure near top of article . ) the most negative voltage is connected to the cathode , and the most positive voltage is connected to the anode . negative high-voltage supplies ( with the positive terminal grounded ) are often preferred , because this configuration enables the photocurrent to be measured at the low voltage side of the circuit for amplification by subsequent electronic circuits operating at low voltage . however , with the photocathode at high voltage , leakage currents sometimes result in unwanted '' dark current '' pulses that may affect the operation . voltages are distributed to the dynodes by a resistive voltage divider , although variations such as active designs ( with transistors or diodes ) are possible . the divider design , which influences frequency response or rise time , can be selected to suit varying applications . some instruments that use photomultipliers have provisions to vary the anode voltage to control the gain of the system . while powered ( energized ) , photomultipliers must be shielded from ambient light to prevent their destruction through overexcitation . in some applications this protection is accomplished mechanically by electrical interlocks or shutters that protect the tube when the photomultiplier compartment is opened . another option is to add overcurrent protection in the external circuit , so that when the measured anode current exceeds a safe limit , the high voltage is reduced . if used in a location with strong magnetic fields , which can curve electron paths , steer the electrons away from the dynodes and cause loss of gain , photomultipliers are usually magnetically shielded by a layer of soft iron or mu-metal . this magnetic shield is often maintained at cathode potential . when this is the case , the external shield must also be electrically insulated because of the high voltage on it . photomultipliers with large distances between the photocathode and the first dynode are especially sensitive to magnetic fields . . applications . photomultipliers were the first electric eye devices , being used to measure interruptions in beams of light . photomultipliers are used in conjunction with scintillators to detect ionizing radiation by means of hand held and fixed radiation protection instruments , and particle radiation in physics experiments . photomultipliers are used in research laboratories to measure the intensity and spectrum of light-emitting materials such as compound semiconductors and quantum dots . photomultipliers are used as the detector in many spectrophotometry . this allows an instrument design that escapes the high-sensitivity applications , and which can therefore substantially increase the dynamic range of the instrument . photomultipliers are used in numerous medical equipment designs . for example , blood analysis devices used by clinical medical laboratories , such as flow cytometry , utilize photomultipliers to determine the relative concentration of various components in blood samples , in combination with optical filters and incandescent lamps . an array of photomultipliers is used in a gamma camera . photomultipliers are typically used as the detectors in flying-spot scanners . high-sensitivity applications . after 50 years , during which solid-state electronic components have largely displaced the vacuum tube , the photomultiplier remains a unique and important optoelectronic component . perhaps its most useful quality is that it acts , electronically , as a nearly perfect current source , owing to the high voltage utilized in extracting the tiny currents associated with weak light signals . there is no johnson noise associated with photomultiplier signal currents , even though they are greatly amplified , e.g . , by 100 thousand times ( i.e . , 100 & nbsp ; db ) or more . the photocurrent still contains shot noise . photomultiplier-amplified photocurrents can be electronically amplified by a high-input-impedance electronic amplifier ( in the signal path subsequent to the photomultiplier ) , thus producing appreciable voltages even for nearly infinitesimally small photon fluxes . photomultipliers offer the best possible opportunity to exceed the johnson noise for many configurations . the aforementioned refers to measurement of light fluxes that , while small , nonetheless amount to a continuous stream of multiple photons . for smaller photon fluxes , the photomultiplier can be operated in photon-counting , or geiger , mode ( see also single-photon avalanche diode ) . in geiger mode the photomultiplier gain is set so high ( using high voltage ) that a single photo-electron resulting from a single photon incident on the primary surface generates a very large current at the output circuit . however , owing to the avalanche of current , a reset of the photomultiplier is required . in either case , the photomultiplier can detect individual photons . the drawback , however , is that not every photon incident on the primary surface is counted either because of less-than-perfect efficiency of the photomultiplier , or because a second photon can arrive at the photomultiplier during the '' dead time '' associated with a first photon and never be noticed . a photomultiplier will produce a small current even without incident photons ; this is called the dark current . photon-counting applications generally demand photomultipliers designed to minimise dark current . nonetheless , the ability to detect single photons striking the primary photosensitive surface itself reveals the quantization principle that einstein put forth . photon counting ( as it is called ) reveals that light , not only being a wave , consists of discrete particles ( i.e . , photons ) . see also . lucas cell scintillation counter silicon photomultiplier total absorption spectroscopy . references . bibliography . wright , a.g . , '' the photomultiplier handbook '' , 616pp , oxford university press , oxford , england ( 2017 ) . engstrom , ralph w . , photomultiplier handbook , rca/burle ( 1980 ) . photomultiplier tubes : basics and applications ( second edition ) , hamamatsu photonics , hamamatsu city , japan , ( 1999 ) . flyckt , s.o . and marmonier , c . , photomultiplier tubes : principles and applications , philips photonics , brive , france ( 2002 ) . external links . molecular expressions – java-based simulation and tutorial on photomultiplier tubes photomultiplier handbook ( 4mb pdf ) from burle industries , essentially the engstrom-rca handbook reprinted photomultiplier technical papers from et-enterprises photomultiplier tubes basics and applications from hamamatsu photonics electron multiplier – simulation of an electron multiplier tube