Man in the Moon

origin . there are various explanations for how the man in the moon came to be . a longstanding european tradition holds that the man was banished to the moon for some crime . christian lore commonly held that he is the man caught gathering sticks on the sabbath and sentenced by god to death by stoning in the book of numbers xv.32–36 . harley , the rev . timothy , fras ( 1885 ) . moon lore , london ; swan sonnenschein , le bas & lowry . p . 21 . archived at internet sacred text archive . retrieved march 2 , 2014 . some germanic cultures thought he was a woodcutter found working on the sabbath . baring-gould , sabine . '' the man in the moon '' , curious myths of the middle ages , london . rivington 's , 1877 , p . 190 there is a roman legend that he is a sheep-thief . one medieval christian tradition claims him to be cain , the wanderer , forever doomed to circle the earth . dante 's inferno dante , the divine comedy , inferno , canto 20 , line 126 and 127 . the dante dartmouth project contains the original text and centuries of commentary . alludes to this : for now doth cain with fork of thorns confine on either hemisphere , touching the wave beneath the towers of seville . yesternight the moon was round . this is mentioned again in his paradise : dante , the divine comedy , paradiso , canto 2 , line 51 . but tell , i pray thee , whence the gloomy spots upon this body , which below on earth give rise to talk of cain in fabling quaint ? there is also a mediaeval jewish tradition that the image of jacob is engraved on the moon . wolfson , elliot r . '' the face of jacob in the moon '' in the seductiveness of jewish myth : challenge or response ? edited by s . daniel breslauer , albany ny ; suny press , 1997 harley , the rev . timothy , fras ( 1885 ) . moon lore , london ; swan sonnenschein , le bas & lowry . p . 21 harley , timothy ( 1885 ) . '' ii . the man in the moon . '' internet sacred text archive . retrieved march 2 , 2014 . john lyly says in the prologue to his endymion ( 1591 ) , '' there liveth none under the sunne , that knows what to make of the man in the moone . '' child , clarence griffin ( 1894 ) . john lyly and euphuism . erlangen etc . : a . deichert . p . 118 . in norse mythology , máni is the male personification of the moon who crosses the sky in a horse-drawn carriage . he is continually pursued by the great wolf hati who catches him at ragnarök . máni simply means '' moon '' . in chinese mythology , the goddess chang ' e is stranded upon the moon after foolishly consuming a double dose of an elixir of life . in some versions of the myth , she is accompanied by yu tu , a moon rabbit . xueting christine ni ( 2018 ) . from kuan yin to chairman mao : the essential guide to chinese deities . red wheel/weiser . pp . 40–43 . in haida mythology , the figure represents a boy gathering sticks . the boy 's father had told him the moon 's light would brighten the night , allowing the chore to be completed . not wanting to gather sticks , the boy complained and ridiculed the moon . as punishment for his disrespect , the boy was taken from earth and trapped on the moon . ( 1899 ) . report of the 68th meeting of the british association for the advancement of science 1898 . 1899 . london : murray . p . 704 . the hydah mission , queen charlotte 's islands charles harrison , church missionary society c . 1884 in japanese mythology , it is said that a tribe of human-like spiritual beings live on the moon . this is especially explored in the tale of the bamboo cutter . in vietnamese mythology , the man in the moon is named cuội . he was originally a woodcutter on earth who owned a magical banyan . one day , when his wife ignorantly watered the tree with unclean water and caused it to uproot itself to fly away , cuội grabbed its roots and was taken to the moon . there , he eternally accompanied the chang ' e and the moon rabbit . chú cuội or the man in the moon vietnam 's magical mid-autumn festival the trio has become the personifications of the mid-autumn festival , when they descend to the mortal world and give out paper lantern , mooncakes and gifts to children . fairy tale of moon lady in vietnam . traditions . there is a traditional european belief that the man in the moon enjoyed drinking , especially claret . an old ballad runs ( original spelling ) : our man in the moon drinks clarret , with powder-beef , turnep , and carret . if he doth so , why should not you drink until the sky looks blew ? the man in the moon drinks claret , as it was sung at the court in holy-well . bagford ballads , folio collection in the british museum , vol . ii . no . 119 . in the english middle ages and renaissance , the moon was held to be the god of drunkards , and at least three london taverns were named '' the man in the moone '' . the man in the moon is named in an early dated english nursery rhyme : the man in the moon came tumbling down and asked his way to norwich ; he went by the south and burnt his mouth with supping cold pease porridge . . examples and occurrence globally . one tradition sees a figure of a man carrying a wide burden on his back . he is sometimes seen as accompanied by a small dog . evans , ben ( 2010 ) . foothold in the heavens : the seventies . springer science & business media . p . 143 . various cultures recognise other examples of lunar pareidolia , such as the moon rabbit . terri windling . '' the symbolism of rabbits and hares '' retrieved september 1 , 2018 . in the northern hemisphere , a common western perception of the face has it that the figure 's eyes are mare imbrium and mare serenitatis , its nose is sinus aestuum , and its open mouth is mare nubium and mare cognitum . skilling , tom ( january 20 , 2017 ) . '' ask tom : what creates the 'man in the moon ' ? '' . chicago tribune . retrieved september 1 , 2018 . this particular human face can also be seen in tropical regions on both sides of the equator . however , the moon orientation associated with the face is observed less frequently—and eventually not at all—as one moves toward the south pole . conventionalized illustrations of the man in the moon seen in western art often show a very simple face in the full moon , or a human profile in the crescent moon , corresponding to no actual markings . some depict a man with a face turned away from the viewer on the ground , for example when viewed from north america , with jesus christ 's crown shown as the lighter ring around mare imbrium . another common one is a cowled death 's head looking down at earth , with the black lava rock 'hood ' around the white dust bone of the skull , and also forming the eye sockets . '' the man in the moon '' can also refer to a mythological character said to live on or in the moon , but who is not necessarily represented by the markings on the face of the moon . an example is yue-laou , from china tradition ; xueting christine ni ( 2018 ) . from kuan yin to chairman mao : the essential guide to chinese deities . red wheel/weiser . p . 141 . another is aiken drum from scotland . the man in the moone by francis godwin , published in 1638 , is one of the earliest novels thought of as containing several traits prototypical of science fiction . scientific explanation . the man in the moon is made up of various lunar maria ( which ones depend on the pareidolic image seen ) . these vast , flat spots on the moon are called '' maria '' or '' seas '' because , for a long time , astronomers believed they were large bodies of water . they are large areas formed by lava that covered up old craters and then cooled , becoming smooth , basalt rock . harrington , philip s . , and edward pascuzzi ( 1994 ) . astronomy for all ages : discovering the universe through activities for children and adults . old saybrook , ct : globe pequot . the near side of the moon , containing these maria that make up the man , is always facing earth . this is due to a tidal locking or synchronous orbit . thought to have occurred because of the gravitational forces partially caused by the moon 's oblong shape , its rotation has slowed to the point where it rotates exactly once on each trip around the earth . this causes the near side of the moon to always turn its face toward earth . . gallery . file : man in the moon - 24 dec 2015 - crop1.jpg near full moon over berlin , germany , in december 2015 , approximately 30 minutes after moonrise file : man in the moon.jpg common interpretation of the man in the moon as seen from the northern hemisphere file : modeled moon appearance for same longitude 30 minutes after moonrise.jpg modeled appearance for same longitude 30 minutes after moonrise . references . external links . man in the moon lore moon illusions the man in the moon and other weird things the man in the moon