Wieliczka

geographic location . the city of wieliczka lies in the south central part of poland , within the małopolska ( lesser poland ) province . the city is located to the southeast of kraków and not far from the town of niepolomice . the wieliczka salt mine – one of the world 's oldest operating salt mines , has been established on significant salt deposits which are also present in nearby bochnia . jerzy grzesiowski , wieliczka : kopalnia , muzeum , zamek ( wieliczka : the mine , the museum , the castle ) , 2nd ed . , updated and augmented , warsaw , sport i turystyka , 1987 , . the town lies in a valley between two ridges that stretch from west to east : south wieliczka foothills , north bogucice sands , including the wieliczka-gdów upland . the south ridge is higher , while the northern ridge leads to national road 94 . near the town lies the a4 highway ( e40 european route ) , which connects kraków with poland 's south western and south eastern regions . despite the small area , the city 's relative altitude accounts for more than 137 –m– : the highest mountain reaches 361,8 metres above the sea , and the lowest point lies at an altitude of 224 metres above sea level . culture . wieliczka , as well as the nearby village of lednica górna are among the last places in poland where the easter tradition of siuda baba is still practised . barbara ogrodowska , zwyczaje , obrzędy i tradycje w polsce . warsaw : verbinum , 2001 , p . 190 . julian zinkow , krakowskie podania , legendy i zwyczaje ( oraz wybór podań i legend jurajskich ) . kraków : wydawnictwo platan , 2004 , p . 216-218 . history . medieval times . the first settlers were probably from the celts tribes . in later years they were driven out by the west slavic or lechites clans . the importance of mining deposits arose after the capital of poland was moved from gniezno to kraków by casimir i the restorer in the 11th century . however , further development of the mining practices was abruptly halted by the mongol invasion , which destroyed kraków and its surroundings in the 13th century . the area was subsequently populated with migrating germans , who called the settlement gross salz ( english : grand/great salt ) and from which the old polish name wielka sól was derived . with time , the name evolved into wieliczka , although the name wielka sól remained in official use , particularly in royal seals and documents . after the 1252 discovery of large salt and potassium deposits across southern poland , the extraction of salt began on a much broader scale . in the year 1289 , henryk iv probus , then lord of kraków , issued a document authorising brothers jescho and isenbold to expand the town . duke and future king premislaus ii granted wieliczka town privileges in 1290 . 17th to 18th century . in 1651 , the population of wieliczka was decimated by a plague . in the years 1655–1660 , at the time of the swedish deluge , the city was in economic decline . the mine was plundered and burned by the swedes and swedish troops guarded the mine and the taxes were raised upon the locals . gabriel wojniłłowicz along with jerzy sebastian lubomirski proceeded to organize approximately 3,000 people which took part in the liberation of wieliczka , bochnia and wiśnicz . the battle took place in kamionna , lesser poland voivodeship , where the poles emerged victorious . 18th to 19th century . after the first partition of poland in 1772 , wieliczka became part of the austrian-led habsburg monarchy . in 1809 , wieliczka was incorporated into the duchy of warsaw ; the habsburgs regained the city after the fall of the duchy and its partition by the congress of vienna . the town then became part of the semi-autonomous province of galicia . under the multicultural austrian empire , many german , hungarian , croatian and transylvanian miners settled in wieliczka , thus changing the ethnic composition of the city . after the outbreak of the kraków uprising in 1846 , the rebellious miners seized power at the salt mines . with progressing industrialization , the town developed into a small city , which was now renowned for its salt production and output throughout the empire . 20th to 21st century . only by the end of the 19th century , the galician authorities began investing in public housing . however , the city expanded with private investments , wealthy entrepreneurs built mining colonies ( organized settlements for families of mine workers ) and power plants ( supplied electricity not only to the mine , but also to the town ) . in the inter-war period , wieliczka 's total population increased which encouraged territorial expansion ; local villages were incorporated into town borders and new residential districts were erected in the 1920s to meet the demands of the growing population . however , the town also witnessed the 1933 miners ' strike , which took place due to the reduction of wages by 13 % . during the first days of world war ii , on 7 september 1939 , the german wehrmacht entered wieliczka . they immediately began to persecute the jewish population of around 1500 , robbing and plundering . during the next two and a half years , they also brought to wieliczka hundreds of jews from other towns in the area , including from the kraków ghetto after the opening of a ghetto in the klasno district . in total , as many as 11,000 jews lived in the ghetto by the time of deportation in 1942 . the town , especially the places jews lived , were severely overcrowded and the population impoverished . in august 1942 , all the jewish population was rounded up . about 700 were taken to a nearby forest where they were shot . others were killed in the town . some 700 young men were taken to pustkow and other forced labor camps . the rest were forced onto trains and sent to the killing camp at belzec where they were murdered by gas on arrival . very few wieliczka jews survived until liberation . on 21 january 1945 , the red army liberated wieliczka from the nazis . during the fighting , 138 soviet soldiers were killed . in 1994 , the city was listed in the list of historic monuments ( poland ) . sport . górnik wieliczka – football club . international relations . twin towns – sister cities . wieliczka is twinned with : bergkamen , germany saint-andre-lez-lille , france sesto fiorentino , italy litovel , czech republic . notable residents . tadeusz ajdukiewicz ( 1852–1916 ) , polish realist painter władysław skoczylas ( 1883–1934 ) , polish watercolorist , woodcutter , sculptor and art teacher esther hamerman ( 1886–1977 ) , american painter , born in wieliczka , eventually moved to vienna adam musiał ( b . 1948 ) retired polish football player and football manager paweł mąciwoda ( b . 1967 ) , polish bassist , member of the german rock band scorpions artur szpilka ( b . 1989 ) , polish professional boxer jan-krzysztof duda ( b . 1998 ) , polish chess grandmaster . gallery . file : pl wieliczna market square.jpg the market square file : wieliczka rynek 04.16 087.jpg tenement houses at the market square file : rynek górny w wieliczce.jpg market square at night file : dostęp do kopalni soli w wieliczce.jpg wieliczka salt mine , a unesco world heritage site file:3453vik kopalnia soli wieliczka . foto barbara maliszewska.jpg interior of the mine file : kościółśw.klemensa-pol , wieliczka.jpg st . clement 's church ( pl ) file : pl wieliczka church of st . klemens 1.jpg interior of st . clement 's church file : przychodzki palace in wieliczka 1.jpg przychodzki palace file : wieliczka , szyb regis - fotopolska.eu ( 338250 ) . jpg regis shaft file : ogrod zupny.jpg the regional house garden in wieliczka file : palac konopkow tomasz2706-1.jpg konopków palace file : wieliczka , zamek żupny , mur i baszta.jpg wieliczka castle file : wieliczka 006.jpg saint kinga 's park file : urzad skarbowy wieliczka.jpg town centre file : wieliczka hotel.jpg turówka hotel file : pomnik mickiewicza.jpg adam mickiewicz monument file : saint sebastian church , 21-23 sw . sebastiana street , city of wieliczka , lesser poland voivodeship , poland.jpg church of st . sebastian in wieliczka file : saint sebastian church ( interior ) , 21-23 sw . sebastiana street , city of wieliczka , lesser poland voivodeship , poland.jpg interior of saint sebastian church file : klasztor franciszkanów wieliczka.jpg franciscan monastery in wieliczka file : wieliczka 020.jpg the monastery courtyard file : i ww military cemetery 381 wieliczka ( graves ) , poland.jpg wwi military cemetery . see also . list of world heritage sites of poland bochnia salt mine . references . ; attribution . external links . wieliczka the salt of the earth/ exhibition of technique in wieliczka wieliczka county page wieliczka on interactive map of kraków jewish community in wieliczka on virtual shtetl see virtual tour virtually visit the franciscan monastery interesting places in wieliczka and małopolska website about search interesting places in wieliczka and małopolska in english it : wieliczka