Herefordshire and Gloucestershire Canal

history . the first plans for a canal between hereford and gloucester were made by robert whitworth , one of james brindley 's pupils , in 1777 . the route was part of a grander plan to link stourport on severn and leominster as well . twelve years later , richard hall submitted plans for a canal via ledbury . in march 1790 , the promoters decided to submit the plans to parliament . josiah clowes , an engineer who had previous experience of working on the chester canal and who had worked with whitworth on the thames and severn canal , was to be the engineer . it appears that he re-surveyed the route , and recommended a change , so that it passed through ledbury . a branch would be built to newent where there were minor coalfields , and the canal would be suitable for boats , capable of carrying 35 tons . the estimated cost was £70,000 , and it was expected to carry 33,203 tons per year , generating £9,582 in revenue . some of the promoters began to think that improving the river wye might be a better option , but the announcement of new seams of coal at newent resulted in a decision to obtain an act of parliament , which was granted in april 1791 . hugh henshall , who was the brother-in-law of james brindley , was asked to re-survey the route in 1792 , and recommended a diversion to newent . this route required a tunnel at oxenhall , and another act of parliament was obtained in 1793 to sanction the new route . josiah clowes died in 1795 , and was succeeded as engineer by robert whitworth . by late 1795 , the initial section was open to newent , but the tunnel was causing major problems . in order to build the tunnel , twenty shafts were sunk along its route , so that there could be multiple working faces . however , there were considerable difficulties caused by the volume of water entering the shafts . horse-powered pumps proved inadequate , and eventually steam-powered pumps were employed , but this added to the cost , and the tunnel was a large factor in the failure to complete the canal . the canal was opened to within one mile of ledbury in 1798 , but stopped there as the cost had far exceeded the estimates . the coal branch to the mines at newent was never a success , as the coal was of very poor quality , and the branch fell into disuse very quickly . the price of coal in the region dropped from 24 shillings ( £1.20 ) per ton to 13/6 ( 68p ) but the coal was a good quality product which travelled up the canal from the river severn . ledbury remained the terminus for another forty years , although a short extension to enable coal to be delivered to the ledbury gas works was completed in 1832 . second phase . in 1827 , stephen ballard became the new clerk of the company , and produced a report on how to complete the canal in 1829 . in 1838 , he proposed a new route for the final section , but the engineer james walker advised against it , and so in may 1839 , a new act of parliament was obtained , allowing the company to raise the money to complete the canal . work started on 17 november . a feeder from the river frome to the summit level was completed in august 1842 , and the canal opened in stages as it was completed , with extensions to canon frome wharf in january 1843 , whithington wharf in february 1844 , and finally to hereford basin on 22 may 1845 . as with the first phase , it was the tunnel construction which caused the most problems , and ashperton tunnel , although only long , was affected by water flooding the work faces and by unstable rock , resulting in the need to construct a brick and stone lining . again , costs escalated well beyond the original estimates . historic herefordshire online . operation . the canal had cost far more to build than was originally planned . the whole canal had been estimated at £69,997 by josiah clowes in 1790 , but the section to ledbury had cost in excess of £104,000 . stephen ballard had estimated the cost of the second phase at £53,000 , but the final cost had been £141,436 . with little increase in trade from the longer canal , the company tried to sell it to a railway company almost immediately , but were unsuccessful , and so tried to boost trade . traffic started to increase , to the extent that a timetable for the transit of the oxenhall tunnel had to be introduced in 1849 . this was not always successful , as the hereford times carried articles in may 1851 about an incident in which boats travelling in opposite directions had met in the middle , and neither would give way . there was deadlock for a period of 58 hours . . decline and closure . in 1858 , the canal carried 47,560 tons of goods , and generated an income of £7,061 in 1860 , but some of this was derived from the carriage of materials to build railways in the area . on 17 january 1862 , less than 17 years after the opening to hereford , the canal was leased to the great western and west midland railway , with a view to converting it to a railway . this did not take place immediately , but on 30 june 1881 , half of the canal was closed , and sections of it were used for the course of the ledbury and gloucester railway . the hereford to ledbury section remained open , but gradually became disused . the canal company continued to receive rent from the great western railway , which it distributed to its shareholders as dividends , and was not formally wound up until the railways were nationalised in 1948 . . route . the canal ran for from hereford basin through ledbury , dymock and newent to over , on the west channel of the river severn west of gloucester , with a short branch to the coal fields at gorsley . the first from hereford to withington , which includes the aylestone tunnel , was level , after which the canal rose by through three locks over the three miles to monkhide . this section includes the skew arch at monkhide , built by ballard at an angle of only 27° to the canal . the bridge was constructed of red brick with some stone dressing , and the parapets are capped with large black engineering bricks which indicate that they were made by b w blades of west bromwich . the bridge is a grade ii listed structure . there is then another level section of more than twelve miles to the outskirts of ledbury , which includes the ashperton tunnel . water is fed into this section from the river frome . the final to over falls by , and includes the oxenhall tunnel , which was not destroyed by the construction of the railway , as the railway company took the sensible decision to avoid the likely problems of enlarging it , and built a diversion to the south-west . the coal branch left the canal below the tunnel . the canal had 22 locks , and three tunnels . like many english canals it was built to carry valuable cargoes by narrowboats . restoration . a series of articles about the canal were published in the local press in early 1983 , and this led to calls for a society to be formed which would raise public awareness of the canal . a meeting was held in hereford to facilitate this on 13 april 1983 , at which a canal society was formed , which soon became actively engaged in restoration . while the original goal was preservation of the remains , in 1992 the society became the herefordshire and gloucestershire canal trust ( h & g canal trust ) and the aim became full restoration of the of canal and locks so that hereford would once again be linked with ledbury , dymock , newent and the rest of the inland waterway system at gloucester . since 1991 the local council authorities in herefordshire have set aside land for development as a canal route . the planning department has approved projects with the canal in mind , and has taken action against those trying to build on the proposed route of the canal . similar support has been given by the local council authorities in gloucestershire . in 2000 , the over canal basin ( adjacent to the river severn at over on the outskirts of gloucester , where the canal links with the inland waterways network ) was reconstructed entirely by volunteers from the canal trust and the national volunteer body the waterway recovery group . the estimated commercial cost of the work was some £500,000 , but it was completed against a 10-month deadline , with a budget of just £60,000 . the basin was originally filled in when the over isolation hospital was built in 1903 . the site was sold for housing development to swan homes , and agreement was reached to excavate the basin to enhance the project , under which wharf house was rebuilt to provide a new canal centre . in late 2011 , the trust were able to buy a short section of the canal above the basin site . this had been purchased by residents in 2004 to protect their communal interests , and was passed to the trust for a nominal sum . like the basin , there was a deadline on development , which had to be completed by september 2012 , but a major effort by the waterway recovery group and members of the trust resulted in most of the work being completed in april 2012 . it was re-watered by 18 april , four months before its scheduled completion date . it was formally re-opened by timothy west and prunella scales at the 2012 over canal festival . major re-development in hereford city centre has resulted in the construction of a new canal bed which will eventually link to a new basin , to form the centrepiece of the edgar street grid development . edgar street grid regeneration further development has also taken place on the aylestone park section , after the removal of silt containing toxic metal . following partial restoration , which saw the trust working on the park , and herefordshire council , owners of the park , working on the canal , a short section at aylestone was used for a boat rally in may 2011 . a slipway enabled the boats to be launched , and the canal will be made wider in due course . the canal connects to an un-navigable part of the river severn , separated from the main channel by weirs at maisemore and llanthony , both of which have derelict locks associated with them . maisemore was sold by british waterways some years ago , and they decided to dispose of llanthony in 2007 . the canal trust used a legacy to purchase the site , which includes two cottages , some land , and a small section of the river severn as well as llanthony lock . the lock is bigger than that at maisemore , and access to the entrance lock at over is easier because boats are travelling against the flow of the river as they approach it . h & g canal trust : restoration : llanthony lock , accessed 27 july 2009 . visitor centre . the wharf house is the herefordshire & gloucestershire canal trust 's new visitor centre , tea rooms by day and restaurant by night , situated at over ( close to the a417/a40 roundabout west of gloucester ) - all profits are donated to the h & g canal trust charity . . see also . canals of the united kingdom history of the british canal system . bibliography . . references . . external links . herefordshire & gloucestershire canal trust herefordshire & gloucestershire canal on soglos.com