Heinrich Schütz

early life . schütz was born in köstritz , the eldest son of christoph schütz and euphrosyne bieger . in 1590 the family moved to weißenfels , where his father managed the inn '' zum güldenen ring '' . his father eventually served as burgomaster in weißenfels , and in 1615 purchased another inn known as both '' zur güldenen sackpfeife '' and '' zum güldenen esel '' – which he renamed '' zum schützen '' . while schütz was living with his parents , his musical talents were discovered by landgrave moritz von hessen-kassel in 1598 during an overnight stay in christoph schütz 's inn . upon hearing young heinrich sing , the landgrave requested that his parents allow the boy to be sent to his noble court for further education and instruction . his parents initially resisted the offer , but after much correspondence they eventually took heinrich to the landgrave 's seat at kassel in august 1599 . after being a choir-boy he went on to study law at marburg before going to venice from 1609–1612 to study music with giovanni gabrieli . gabrieli is the only person schütz ever referred to as being his teacher . he also inherited a ring from gabrieli shortly before the latter 's death . he subsequently was organist at kassel from 1613 to 1615 . dresden ( 1615–1672 ) . after a prolonged yet polite negotiation between the landgrave and the elector , schütz moved to dresden in 1615 to work as court composer to the elector of saxony . in 1619 schütz married magdalena wildeck ( born 1601 ) . she bore two daughters before her death in 1625 : anna justina , born in 1621 , and euphrosyne , born in 1623 . in dresden schütz sowed the seeds of what is now the sächsische staatskapelle dresden , but left there on several occasions ; in 1628 he went to venice again , where he met and studied with claudio monteverdi . in 1633 he was invited to copenhagen to compose the music for wedding festivities there , eventually returning to dresden in 1635 . he again conducted an extended visit to denmark in 1641 , due to the devastation of the electoral court . the thirty years ' war ended in 1648 , and he again became more active in dresden . in 1655 , the year that his daughter euphrosyne died , he accepted an ex officio post as kapellmeister at wolfenbüttel . his dresden compositions during the thirty years ' war were , by necessity of the times , smaller scale than the oft-massive works before , although this period produced much of his most charming music . after the war , schütz again wrote larger-scale compositions culminating in the 1660s , when he composed the greatest passionmusic before bach . schütz moved back to weißenfels , in a retirement he had to beg for , to live with his sister ( the house is now a fine museum of his life ) , but the electoral court often called him back to dresden . he died in dresden from a stroke in 1672 at the age of 87 . he was buried in the old dresden frauenkirche , but his tomb was destroyed in 1727 when the church was torn down to build the new dresden frauenkirche . ( his long-time house on the same square has been reconstructed in the same style and is an apartment building with hotel rooms and a restaurant . ) his pupils included heinrich albert , christoph bernhard , anton colander , constantin christian dedekind , carlo farina , johann wilhelm furchheim , johann kaspar horn , caspar kittel , christoph kittel , johann klemm , adam krieger , johann jakob loewe ( or löwe ) , johann nauwach , david pohle , philipp stolle , johann theile , clemens thieme , johann vierdanck , matthias weckmann , friedrich werner , friedrich von westhoff . david mason greene greene 's biographical encyclopedia of composers p . 115 '' when the elector finally let him go , schütz managed to wrest from him money to permit his pupil and protégé matthias weckmann to study in hamburg for three years with jakob praetorius . he remained in the danish court for two years , '' the encyclopedia of the lutheran church julius bodensieck , lutheran world federation . 1965 . '' the most eminent among his pupils were h . albert , m . weckmann , d . pohle , chr . bernhard , jj loewe , a . krieger , j . theile . '' . style . schütz 's compositions show the influence of his teacher gabrieli ( displayed most notably with schütz 's use of resplendent polychoral and concertato styles ) and of monteverdi . additionally , the influence of the netherlandish composers of the 16th century is prominent in his work . his best known works are in the field of sacred music , ranging from solo voice with instrumental accompaniment to a cappella choral music . representative works include his psalmen davids ( psalms of david , opus 2 ) , cantiones sacrae ( opus 4 ) , three books of symphoniae sacrae , die sieben worte jesu christi am kreuz ( the seven words of jesus christ on the cross ) , three passion settings and the christmas story . schütz 's music , while starting off in the most progressive styles early in his career , eventually grew into a style that is simple and almost austere , culminating with his late passion settings . practical considerations were certainly responsible for part of this change : the thirty years ' war had devastated the musical infrastructure of germany , and it was no longer practical or even possible to put on the gigantic works in the venetian style which marked his earlier period . the unique composition '' es steh gott auf '' ( swv 356 ) is in many respects comparable to monteverdi . gerald drebes : ‘ ‘ schütz , monteverdi und die „ vollkommenheit der musik “ – „ es steh gott auf “ aus den „ symphoniae sacrae “ ii ( 1647 ) ‘ ‘ . in : ‘ ‘ schütz-jahrbuch ‘ ‘ , jg . 14 , 1992 , pp . 25–55 . online : . his funeral music '' musikalische exequien '' ( 1636 ) for his noble friend heinrich posthumus of reuss is considered a masterpiece , and is known today as the first german requiem . schütz was equally fluent in his latin or germanic styles . schütz was one of the last composers to write in a modal style . his harmonies often result from the contrapuntal alignment of voices rather than from any sense of '' harmonic motion '' ; contrastingly , much of his music shows a strong tonal pull when approaching cadences . his music includes a great deal of imitation , but structured in such a way that the successive voices do not necessarily enter after the same number of beats or at predictable intervallic distances . this contrasts sharply with the manner of his contemporary samuel scheidt , whose counterpoint usually flows in regularly spaced entries . schütz 's writing often includes intense dissonances caused by the contrapuntal motion of voices moving in correct individual linear motion , but resulting in startling harmonic tension . above all , his music displays extreme sensitivity to the accents and meaning of the text , which is often conveyed using special technical figures drawn from musica poetica , themselves drawn from or created in analogy to the verbal figures of classical rhetoric . however , as noted above , the composer 's style became simpler in his later works , which make less frequent use of the kind of distantly related chords and licences found in such pieces as '' was hast du verwirket '' ( swv 307 ) from kleine geistliche konzerte ii . beyond the early book of madrigals , almost no secular music by schütz has survived , save for a few domestic songs ( arien ) and occasional commemorative items ( such as wie wenn der adler sich aus seiner klippe schwingt ( swv 434 ) , and no purely instrumental music at all ( unless one counts the short instrumental movement entitled '' sinfonia '' that encloses the dialogue of die sieben worte ) , even though he had a reputation as one of the finest organists in germany . schütz was of great importance in bringing new musical ideas to germany from italy , and thus had a large influence on the german music which was to follow . the style of the north german organ school derives largely from schütz ( as well as from the dutchman jan pieterszoon sweelinck ) ; a century later this music was to culminate in the work of j.s . bach . after bach , the most important composers to be influenced by schütz were anton webern and brahms , who were known to have studied his works . works . image : portrait of a musician possibly by rembrandt.jpg thumb rembrandt : man with a sheet of music , 1633 ( national gallery of art , washington , d.c . , 2014.136.41 ; formerly in the corcoran gallery of art , william a . clark collection ) . in schütz research literature , regarded as inauthentic and not portraying heinrich schütz . cf . steude 1986 , pp . 58–61 the following are major published works ; most of these contain multiple pieces of music ; single published works are also listed in the complete work list , including major works such as the seven last words , and the passions ( according to matthew , luke , and john ) . there are over 500 total surviving individual pieces by schütz . il primo libro de madrigali ( first book of madrigals ) ( opus 1 , venice , 1611 ) psalmen davids ( book 1 ) ( opus 2 , dresden , 1619 ) historia der . aufferstehung . ( the resurrection ) ( opus 3 , dresden , 1623 ) cantiones sacrae ( opus 4 , freiberg , 1625 ) becker psalter ( opus 5 , freiberg , 1628 , revised 1661 ) symphoniae sacrae ( book 1 ) ( opus 6 , venice , 1629 ) musikalische exequien ( opus 7 , dresden , 1636 ) kleine geistliche konzerte ( book 1 ) ( opus 8 , leipzig , 1636 ) kleine geistliche konzerte ( book 2 ) ( opus 9 , leipzig , 1639 ) symphoniae sacrae ( book 2 ) ( opus 10 , dresden , 1647 ) geistliche chor-music ( opus 11 , dresden , 1648 ) symphoniae sacrae ( book 3 ) ( opus 12 , dresden , 1650 ) zwölf geistliche gesänge ( opus 13 , dresden , 1657 ) historia der . geburt . jesu christi ( christmas story ; dresden , 1664 ) lukas-passion ( the passion according to st . luke ) ( dresden , 1665 ) johannes-passion ( the passion according to st . john ) ( dresden , 1666 ) matthäus-passion ( the passion according to st . matthew ) ( dresden , 1666 ) königs und propheten 119er psalm . ( psalm 119 , psalm 100 , and german magnificat : '' swan song '' ) ( opus ultimum , dresden , 1671 )