Minersville School District v. Gobitis

background . jehovah 's witnesses and compulsory flag pledges . mandatory flag pledges in public schools were motivated by patriotic fervor in wartime america . the first known mandatory flag pledges were instituted in a number of states during the spanish–american war . during world war i , many more states instituted mandatory flag pledges with only a few dissents recorded by the american civil liberties union . on monday , june 3 , 1935 , watch tower society president j . f . rutherford , was interviewed at a witness convention about '' the flag salute by children in school '' . he told the convention audience that to salute an earthly emblem , ascribing salvation to it , was unfaithfulness to god . rutherford said that he would not do it . '' '' united states of america '' , 1975 yearbook of jehovah 's witnesses , ©1975 watch tower , page 168 while the matter was not yet established doctrine or written policy of jehovah 's witnesses , at least some witness families quickly made a personal conscientious decision on the matter . the gobitas family seems to have made such a personal conscientious decision in the weeks between the convention and the beginning of the new school year ( typically about september 1 in the united states ) . according to her later written account , then-eleven-year-old lillian gobitas and her ten-year-old brother were impressed by rutherford 's answer , and they '' talked about it with our parents and looked up exodus 20:4-6 , 1 john 5:21 , and matthew 22:21 . mom and dad never pressured us or made us feel guilty . when school opened in september , we were very much aware of what we ought to do . '' - see lillian gobitas memoir '' the courage to put god first '' , awake ! , july 22 , 1993 , ©1993 watch tower , page 13 in september in lynn , massachusetts , a third-grader and jehovah 's witness named carleton nichols nichols name was misspelled in some reports , and in the early case carlton b . nicholls v . mayor and school committee of lynn ( massachusetts ) , wherein massachusetts supreme judicial court ruled that no allowance need be made for religious belief by mandatory school flag salutes . see '' 'defending and legally establishing the good news ' '' , jehovah 's witnesses – proclaimers of god 's kingdom , ©1993 watch tower , page 684-685 refused to recite the pledge of allegiance and was expelled from school . '' united states of america '' , 1975 yearbook of jehovah 's witnesses , ©1975 watch tower , page 168 , '' in addition to nichols , at least one other witness student , barbara meredith , took the same stand at her school in sudbury , massachusetts , the same day . '' but her situation did not reach the press , as she had a teacher who was tolerant and did not make an issue out of it . '' the nichols incident received widespread media attention , and other witness students soon followed suit . rutherford gave a radio address praising nichols , anecdotally , rutherford 's radio address further solidified the resolution of witnesses and their children to pointedly refuse to salute the flag . lillian gobitas writes that for the first few weeks of school in september 1935 she had silently mouthed , but not actually uttered , the pledge ; she changed her view , she writes , when on . '' october 6 , brother rutherford made a coast-to-coast radio broadcast entitled '' saluting a flag . '' he explained that we respect the flag but that going through rituals before an image or emblem was actually idolatry . our relationship with jehovah would strictly forbid this . '' on october 22 , bill gobitas , her brother , just ten years old , came home from school all smiles . '' i stopped saluting the flag ! '' he said triumphantly . '' the teacher tried to put up my arm , but i held on to my pocket . '' '' the next morning , heart pounding , i went to my teacher before class so that i would n't weaken . '' miss shofstal , '' i stammered , '' i ca n't salute the flag anymore . the bible says at exodus chapter 20 that we ca n't have any other gods before jehovah god . '' to my surprise she just hugged me and said what a dear girl i was . well , when the flag ceremony time came , i did not join in the salute . '' - '' the courage to put god first '' , awake ! , july 22 , 1993 , watch tower , page 13 and schools around the country began expelling witness students and firing witness teachers . jehovah 's witnesses published the booklet loyalty , making the matter an official doctrine of the faith before the end of 1935 . witnesses hired teachers and set up '' kingdom schools '' to continue their children 's education . the national leadership subsequently decided to make an issue of the forced pledges and asked people to stand up for their right to religious freedom . those who heeded this call and challenged the practice of pledging the flag were accused of working with or being duped by german sympathizers . ironically , jehovah 's witnesses in germany under hitler rule were sentenced to concentration camps for the same reason , namely the denial to salute national symbols . a further irony lay in the fact that , at the time , many flag pledges were performed not with the right hand over the heart as they are today , but instead with an bellamy salute , a gesture which has now become associated with the '' sieg heil '' salute of the nazis . . facts of the case . walter gobitas the name was misspelled '' gobitis '' in the court 's decision , but was in fact '' gobitas . '' peters , shawn francis judging jehovah 's witnesses : religious persecution and the dawn of the rights revolution , pg . 13 ( university of kansas press : 2000 ) was a recent convert to the jehovah 's witnesses . gobitas was inspired by stories of other jehovah 's witnesses who challenged the system and suffered for it , and decided to make a stand himself and instructed his children not to pledge allegiance when at school . minersville , pennsylvania was predominantly roman catholic and there was significant animosity towards the jehovah 's witnesses . tensions were already high before this case arose and many viewed this as one way to get back at the witnesses . as a result , his children were subjected to teasing , taunting , and attacks from the other kids . for lillian , this meant giving up her status as class president and losing most of her friends . '' when i 'd come to school , '' she said , '' they would throw a hail of pebbles and yell things like , 'here comes jehovah ! ' billy 's fifth-grade teacher attempted to physically force his arm out of his pocket to make the requisite salute . a local catholic church started a boycott of the family store and its business dropped off . because of their eventual expulsion , their father had to pay for them to enroll in a private school , resulting in even more economic hardship . at first , the school board was in a quandary because the law did not provide penalties for those who refused to pledge . finally , though , the school board got permission to punish the gobitas children and expelled them , without appeal . trial . the case was argued in philadelphia on 15 february 1938 . during the trial , school superintendent roudabush displayed contempt for the beliefs of the children , stating that he felt they had been '' indoctrinated '' and that the existence of even a few dissenters would be '' demoralizing , '' leading to widespread disregard for the flag and american values . four months later district judge albert b . maris found that the board 's requirement that the children salute the flag was an unconstitutional violation of their free exercise of religious beliefs . . third circuit . within two weeks , the school board unanimously agreed to appeal the decision . oral arguments in the appeal were made before the third circuit of the u.s . court of appeals on 9 november 1938 . one year later , the three-judge court unanimously affirmed the district court decision . despite its two defeats in the lower courts , the school board decided to take its case to the supreme court , authorizing its attorney to file a petition for a writ of certiorari , which the court granted on 4 march 1940 . . . oral argument . the court heard oral arguments on 25 april . joseph rutherford , president of the watch tower society , and himself a lawyer , took over the defense , assisted by the new head of the religious group 's legal department , hayden covington . manwaring , render unto caesar the aclu and the committee on the bill of rights of the american bar association filed amicus curiae briefs . . opinion of the court . the court 's decision was nearly unanimous ; only justice harlan f . stone dissented . in an 8-to-1 decision , the court upheld the mandatory flag salute , declining to make itself '' the school board for the country . '' justice felix frankfurter wrote the majority decision ; in doing so , he relied primarily on the '' secular regulation '' rule , which weighs the secular purpose of a nonreligious government regulation against the religious practice it makes illegal or otherwise burdens the exercise of religion . he identified the pennsylvania flag-salute requirement as an intrinsically secular policy enacted to encourage patriotism among school children . frankfurter wrote that the school district 's interest in creating national unity was enough to allow them to require students to salute the flag . according to frankfurter , the nation needed loyalty and the unity of all the people . since saluting the flag was a primary means of achieving this legitimate goal , an issue of national importance was at stake . the court held that the state 's interest in '' national cohesion '' was '' inferior to none in the hierarchy of legal values '' . national unity is the basis of national security . to deny the legislature the right to select appropriate means for its attainment presents a totally different order of problem from that of the propriety of subordinating the possible ugliness of littered streets to the free expression opinion through handbills . weighing the circumstances in this case , he argued that the social need for conformity with the requirement was greater than the individual liberty claims of the jehovah 's witnesses . he emphasized that conscientious scruples have not , in the course of the long struggle for religious toleration , relieved the individual from obedience to a general law not aimed at the promotion or restriction of religious beliefs frankfurter further wrote that the recitation of a pledge advanced the cause of patriotism in the united states . he said the country 's foundation as a free society depends upon building sentimental ties . the flag , the court found , was an important symbol of national unity and could be a part of legislative initiatives designed '' to promote in the minds of children who attend the common schools an attachment to the institutions of their country . '' . dissenting opinion . harlan stone , the lone dissenter from the majority 's decision , wrote : . effects of the decision . on june 9 , a mob of 2,500 burned the kingdom hall in kennebunkport , maine . on june 16 , litchfield , illinois police jailed all of that town 's sixty witnesses , ostensibly protecting them from their neighbors . on june 18 , townspeople in rawlins , wyoming brutally beat five witnesses ; on june 22 , the people of parco , wyoming tarred and feathered another . the american civil liberties union reported to the justice department that nearly 1,500 witnesses were physically attacked in more than 300 communities nationwide . one southern sheriff told a reporter why witnesses were being run out of town : '' they 're traitors ; the supreme court says so . ai n't you heard ? '' shawn francis peters judging jehovah 's witnesses : religious persecution and the dawn of rights revolution ( lawrence , kansas : university press of kansas , 2000 ) 84 . first lady eleanor roosevelt appealed publicly for calm , while newspaper editorials and the american legal community condemned the gobitis decision as a blow to liberty . on june 8 , 1942 , supreme court justices black , douglas and murphy stated in their opinion on jones v . city of opelika that , although they had concurred with the majority in the gobitis case , they now believed that that case had been wrongly decided . . . subsequent history . partly because of the violent reaction to its decision , including the lynching of jehovah witnesses , shawn francis peters in his book judging jehovah 's witnesses : religious persecution and the dawn of the rights revolution the ruling did not stand for long . frank murphy in particular regretted his decision , and instructed his clerk to look out for an opportunity to revisit the issue . university of michigan law quadrangle notes on frank murphy . the elevation of harlan fiske stone to chief justice , and the appointment of two new members to the supreme court , were also factors in the court 's reversal of policy . leming , robert s . eric clearinghouse for social studies/social science education bloomington in . teaching about landmark dissents in united states supreme court cases . eric digest . on 14 june 1943 ( flag day ) , the court handed down west virginia state board of education v . barnette . in addition to murphy , justices black and douglas also reversed their opinions , resulting in a 6–3 vote . the majority opinion written by robert jackson echoed justice stone 's dissent when he wrote , '' if there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation , it is that no official , high or petty , can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics , nationalism , religion or other matters of opinion '' . konkoly , toni . law , power & personality , the supreme court , famous dissents : minersville school district v . gobitis . public broadcasting service . the active persecution of jehovah 's witnesses abated somewhat , although thousands were arrested during world war ii for seeking religious exemption from military service . they were accused of being unpatriotic , and even of being nazi sympathizers .