Critical chain project management

origins . critical chain project management is based on methods and algorithms derived from theory of constraints . the idea of ccpm was introduced in 1997 in eliyahu m . goldratt 's book , critical chain . application of ccpm has been credited with achieving projects 10 % to 50 % faster and/or cheaper than the traditional methods ( i.e . , cpm , pert , gantt , etc . ) developed from 1910 to 1950s . according to studies of traditional project management methods by standish group and others as of 1998 , only 44 % of projects typically finish on time . projects typically complete at 222 % of the duration originally planned , 189 % of the original budgeted cost , 70 % of projects fall short of their planned scope ( technical content delivered ) , and 30 % are cancelled before completion . ccpm tries to improve performance relative to these traditional statistics . details . with traditional project management methods , 30 % of lost time and resources are typically consumed by wasteful techniques such as bad multitasking ( in particular task switching ) , student syndrome , parkinson 's law , in-box delays , and lack of prioritization . harvey maylor , project management in a project plan , the critical chain is the sequence of both precedence- and resource-dependent tasks that prevents a project from being completed in a shorter time , given finite resources . if resources are always available in unlimited quantities , then a project 's critical chain is identical to its critical path method . critical chain is an alternative to critical path analysis . main features that distinguish critical chain from critical path are : use of ( often implicit ) resource dependencies . implicit means that they are not included in the project network , but must be identified by looking at the resource requirements . lack of search for an optimum solution—a '' good enough '' solution is enough because : as far as is known , there is no analytical method for finding an absolute optimum ( i.e . , having the overall shortest critical chain ) . the inherent uncertainty in estimates is much greater than the difference between the optimum and near-optimum ( '' good enough '' solutions ) . identification and insertion of buffers : project buffer feeding buffers resource buffers ( companies are usually reluctant to give more resources ) monitoring project progress and health by monitoring the consumption rate of the buffers rather than individual task performance to schedule . ccpm planning aggregates the large amounts of safety time added to tasks within a project into the buffers—to protect due-date performance and avoid wasting this safety time through bad multitasking , student syndrome , parkinson 's law , and poorly synchronized integration . critical chain project management uses buffer management instead of earned value management to assess the performance of a project . some project managers feel that the earned value management technique is misleading , because it does not distinguish progress on the project constraint ( i.e . , on the critical chain ) from progress on non-constraints ( i.e . , on other paths ) . event chain methodology can determine a size of project , feeding , and resource buffers . planning . a project plan or work breakdown structure ( wbs ) is created in much the same fashion as with critical path . the plan is worked backward from a completion date with each task starting as late as possible . a duration is assigned to each task . some software implementations add a second duration : one a '' best guess , '' or 50 % probability duration , and a second '' safe '' duration , which should have higher probability of completion ( perhaps 90 % or 95 % , depending on the amount of risk that the organization can accept ) . other software implementations go through the duration estimate of every task and remove a fixed percentage to be aggregated into the buffers . resources are assigned to each task , and the plan is resource leveled , using the aggressive durations . the longest sequence of resource-leveled tasks that lead from beginning to end of the project is then identified as the critical chain . the justification for using the 50 % estimates is that half of the tasks will finish early and half will finish late , so that the variance over the course of the project should be zero . recognizing that tasks are more likely to take more time than less time due to parkinson 's law , student syndrome , or other reasons , ccpm uses '' buffers '' to monitor project schedule and financial performance . the '' extra '' duration of each task on the critical chain—the difference between the '' safe '' durations and the 50 % durations—is gathered in a buffer at the end of the project . in the same way , buffers are gathered at the end of each sequence of tasks that feed into the critical chain . the date at the end of the project buffer is given to external stakeholders as the delivery date . finally , a baseline is established , which enables financial monitoring of the project . an alternate duration-estimation methodology uses probability-based quantification of duration using monte carlo simulation . in 1999 , a researcher applied simulation to assess the impact of risks associated with each component of project work breakdown structure on project duration , cost and performance . using monte carlo simulation , the project manager can apply different probabilities for various risk factors that affect a project component . the probability of occurrence can vary from 0 % to 100 % chance of occurrence . the impact of risk is entered into the simulation model along with the probability of occurrence . the number of iterations of monte carlo simulation depend on the tolerance level of error and provide a density graph illustrating the overall probability of risk impact on project outcome . execution . when the plan is complete and the project is ready to start , the project network is fixed and the buffers ' sizes are '' locked '' ( i.e . , their planned duration may not be altered during the project ) , because they are used to monitor project schedule and financial performance . with no slack in the duration of individual tasks , resources are encouraged to focus on the task at hand to complete it and hand it off to the next person or group . the objective here is to eliminate bad multitasking . this is done by providing priority information to all resources . the literature draws an analogy with a relay race . each element on the project is encouraged to move as quickly as they can : when they are running their '' leg '' of the project , they should be focused on completing the assigned task as quickly as possible , with minimization of distractions and multitasking . in some case studies , actual batons are reportedly hung by the desks of people when they are working on critical chain tasks so that others know not to interrupt . the goal , here , is to overcome the tendency to delay work or to do extra work when there seems to be time . the ccpm literature contrasts this with '' traditional '' project management that monitors task start and completion dates . ccpm encourages people to move as quickly as possible , regardless of dates . because task duration has been planned at the 50 % probability duration , there is pressure on resources to complete critical chain tasks as quickly as possible , overcoming student 's syndrome and parkinson 's law . monitoring . according to proponents , monitoring is , in some ways , the greatest advantage of the critical chain method . because individual tasks vary in duration from the 50 % estimate , there is no point in trying to force every task to complete '' on time ; '' estimates can never be perfect . instead , we monitor the buffers created during the planning stage . a fever chart or similar graph can be created and posted to show the consumption of buffer as a function of project completion . if the rate of buffer consumption is low , the project is on target . if the rate of consumption is such that there is likely to be little or no buffer at the end of the project , then corrective actions or recovery plans must be developed to recover the loss . when the buffer consumption rate exceeds some critical value ( roughly : the rate where all of the buffer may be expected to be consumed before the end of the project , resulting in late completion ) , then those alternative plans need to be implemented . history . critical sequence was originally identified in the 1960s .