Beech

etymology . the name of the tree in latin , fagus ( from whence the generic epithet ) , is cognate with english '' beech '' and of indo-european origin , and played an important role in early debates on the geographical origins of the indo-european people , the beech argument . greek φηγός is from the same root , but the word was transferred to the oak tree ( e.g . iliad 16.767 ) as a result of the absence of beech trees in greece . robert beekes , etymological dictionary of greek , leiden and boston 2010 , pp . 1565–6 . taxonomy . recent classification systems of the genus recognize 10 to 13 species in two distinct subgenera , engleriana and fagus . denk , thomas with guido grimm and vera hemleben . 2005 . patterns of molecular and morphological differentiation in fagus ( fagaceae ) : phylogenetic implications . american journal of botany 92 ( 6 ) :1006-1016 . shen , chung-fu . 1992 . a monograph of the genus fagus tourn . ex l . ( fagaceae ) . ph.d . dissertation , city university of new york . the engleriana subgenus is found only in east asia , and is notably distinct from the fagus subgenus in that these beeches are low-branching trees , often made up of several major trunks with yellowish bark . further differentiating characteristics include the whitish bloom on the underside of the leaves , the visible tertiary leaf veins , and a long , smooth cupule-peduncle . f . japonica , f . engleriana , and the species f . okamotoi , proposed by the botanist chung-fu shen in 1992 , comprise this subgenus . the better known fagus subgenus beeches are high-branching with tall , stout trunks and smooth silver-grey bark . this group includes f . sylvatica , f . grandifolia , f . crenata , f . lucida , f . longipetiolata , and f . hayatae . the classification of the european beech , f . sylvatica , is complex , with a variety of different names proposed for different species and subspecies within this region ( for example f . taurica , f . orientalis , and f . moesica gomory , d . with l . paule , r . brus , p . zhelev , z . tomovic , and j . gracan . 1999 . genetic differentiation and phylogeny of beech on the balkan peninsula . journal of evolutionary biology 12 : 746-752 . ) . research suggests that beeches in eurasia differentiated fairly late in evolutionary history , during the miocene . the populations in this area represent a range of often overlapping morphotypes , and genetic analysis does not clearly support separate species . denk , thomas with guido grimm , k . stogerer , m . langer , vera hemleben 2002 . the evolutionary history of fagus in western eurasia : evidence from genes , morphology and the fossil record . plant systematics and evolution 232:213-236 . within its family , the fagaceae , recent research has suggested that fagus is the evolutionarily most basal group . manos , paul s . with kelly p . steele . 1997 . phylogenetic analysis of “ higher ” hamamelididae based on plasid sequence data . american journal of botany 84 ( 10 ) :1407-1419 . the southern beeches ( genus nothofagus ) previously thought closely related to beeches , are now treated as members of a separate family , the nothofagaceae ( which remains a member of the order fagales ) . they are found in australia , new zealand , new guinea , new caledonia , argentina , and chile ( principally patagonia and tierra del fuego ) . species . the following is a partial list of taxa which have been accepted as species at one point : fagus chienii w.c.cheng fagus crenata blume fagus engleriana seemen ex diels – chinese beech fagus grandifolia ehrh . fagus hayatae palib . ex hayata fagus japonica maxim . fagus longipetiolata seemen fagus lucida rehder & e.h.wilson fagus orientalis lipsky fagus sylvatica l . – european beech fagus × taurica popl . †fagus subferruginea . description . the european beech ( fagus sylvatica ) is the most commonly cultivated , although few important differences are seen between species aside from detail elements such as leaf shape . the leaves of beech trees are entire or sparsely toothed , from long and broad . beeches are monoecious , bearing both male and female flowers on the same plant . the small flowers are unisexual , the female flowers borne in pairs , the male flowers wind-pollinating catkins . they are produced in spring shortly after the new leaves appear . the bark is smooth and light grey . the fruit is a small , sharply three-angled nut long , borne singly or in pairs in soft-spined husks long , known as cupules . the husk can have a variety of spine- to scale-like appendages , the character of which is , in addition to leaf shape , one of the primary ways beeches are differentiated . the nuts are edible , though bitter ( though not nearly as bitter as acorns ) with a high tannin content , and are called beechnuts or beechmast . distribution . britain and ireland . fagus sylvatica was a late entrant to great britain after the last glaciation , and may have been restricted to basic soils in the south of england . some suggest that it was introduced by neolithic tribes who planted the trees for their edible nuts . the beech is classified as a native in the south of england and as a non-native in the north where it is often removed from 'native ' woods . large areas of the chilterns are covered with beech woods , which are habitat to the common bluebell and other flora . the cwm clydach national nature reserve in southeast wales was designated for its beech woodlands , which are believed to be on the western edge of their natural range in this steep limestone gorge . beech is not native to ireland ; however , it was widely planted from the 18th century , and can become a problem shading out the native woodland understory . today , beech is widely planted for hedging and in deciduous woodlands , and mature , regenerating stands occur throughout mainland britain at elevations below about . preston , pearman & dines ( 2002 ) new atlas of the british flora . oxford university press the tallest and longest hedge in the world ( according to guinness world records ) is the meikleour beech hedge in meikleour , perth and kinross , scotland . continental europe . fagus sylvatica is one of the most common hardwood trees in north central europe , in france alone constituting about 15 % of all nonconifers . europe is also home to the lesser-known oriental beech ( f . orientalis ) and crimean beech ( f . taurica ) . as a naturally growing forest tree , beech marks the important border between the european deciduous forest zone and the northern pine forest zone . this border is important for wildlife and fauna . in denmark and scania at the southernmost peak of the scandinavian peninsula , south-west of the natural spruce boundary , it is the most common forest tree . it grows naturally in denmark and southern norway and sweden up to about 57–59°n . the most northern known naturally growing ( not planted ) beech trees are found in a small grove north of bergen on the west coast of norway . near the city of larvik is the largest naturally occurring beech forest in norway , bøkeskogen . some research suggests that early agriculture patterns supported the spread of beech in continental europe . research has linked the establishment of beech stands in scandinavia and germany with cultivation and fire disturbance , i.e . early agricultural practices . other areas which have a long history of cultivation , bulgaria for example , do not exhibit this pattern , so how much human activity has influenced the spread of beech trees is as yet unclear . bradshaw , r.h.w . with n . kito and t . giesecke . 2010 . factors influencing the holocene history of fagus . forest ecology and management 259:2204-2212 . the primeval beech forests of the carpathians are also an example of a singular , complete , and comprehensive forest dominated by a single tree species - the beech tree . forest dynamics here were allowed to proceed without interruption or interference since the last ice age . nowadays , they are amongst the last pure beech forests in europe to document the undisturbed postglacial repopulation of the species , which also includes the unbroken existence of typical animals and plants . north america . the american beech ( fagus grandifolia ) occurs across much of the eastern united states and southeastern canada , with a disjunct population in mexico . it is the only fagus species in the western hemisphere . prior to the pleistocene ice age , it is believed to have spanned the entire width of the continent from the atlantic ocean to the pacific , but now is confined to east of the great plains . f . grandifolia tolerates hotter climates than european species , but is not planted much as an ornamental due to slower growth and less resistance to urban pollution . it most commonly occurs as an overstory component in the northern part of its range with sugar maple , transitioning to other forest types further south such as beech-magnolia . american beech is rarely encountered in developed areas except as a remnant of a forest that was cut down for land development . asia . east asia is home to five species of fagus , only one of which ( f . crenata ) is occasionally planted in western countries . smaller than f . sylvatica and f . grandifolia , this beech is one of the most common hardwoods in its native range . ecology . beech grows on a wide range of soil types , acidic or basic , provided they are not waterlogged . the tree canopy casts dense shade , and carpets the ground thickly with leaf litter . in north america , they can form beech-maple climax forests by partnering with the sugar maple . the beech blight aphid ( grylloprociphilus imbricator ) is a common pest of american beech trees . beeches are also used as food plants by some species of lepidoptera . beech bark is extremely thin and scars easily . since the beech tree has such delicate bark , carvings , such as lovers ' initials and other forms of graffiti , remain because the tree is unable to heal itself . lawrence , gale . a field guide to the familiar : learning to observe the natural world . hanover : university press of new england , 1984 . 75-76 . print . . diseases . beech bark disease is a fungal infection that attacks the american beech through damage caused by scale insects . '' beech . '' the columbia encyclopedia . new york : columbia university press , 2008 . credo reference . web . 17 september 2012 . infection can lead to the death of the tree . beech bark disease . '' dictionary of microbiology & molecular biology . hoboken : wiley , 2006 . credo reference . web . 27 september 2012 . beech leaf disease is a disease spread by the newly discovered nematode , litylenchus crenatae mccannii . this disease was first discovered in lake county , ohio in 2012 and has now spread to over 41 counties in ohio , pennsylvania , new york , and ontario , canada . uses . beech wood is an excellent firewood , easily split and burning for many hours with bright but calm flames . slats of beech wood are washed in caustic soda to leach out any flavour or aroma characteristics and are spread around the bottom of fermentation tanks for budweiser beer . this provides a complex surface on which the yeast can settle , so that it does not pile up , preventing yeast autolysis which would contribute off-flavours to the beer . beech logs are burned to dry the malt used in german smoked beers . beech is also used to smoke westphalian ham , traditional andouille ( an offal sausage ) from normandy , and some cheeses . some drums are made from beech , which has a tone between those of maple and birch , the two most popular drum woods . the textile modal is a kind of rayon often made wholly from reconstituted cellulose of pulped beech wood . holistic-interior-designs.com , modal fabric , retrieved 9 october 2011 uniformreuse.co.uk , modal data sheet , retrieved 9 october 2011 fabricstockexchange.com , modal ( dictionary entry ) , retrieved 9 october 2011 the european species fagus sylvatica yields a utility timber that is tough but dimensionally unstable . it weighs about 720 & nbsp ; kg per cubic metre and is widely used for furniture framing and carcase construction , flooring and engineering purposes , in plywood and in household items like plates , but rarely as a decorative wood . the timber can be used to build chalets , houses and log cabins . beech wood is used for the stocks of military rifles when traditionally preferred woods such as walnut are scarce or unavailable or as a lower-cost alternative . walter j . ( 2006 ) rifles of the world , 3rd edition . krause publications , wisconsin us the fruit of the beech tree , known as beechnuts or mast , is found in small burrs that drop from the tree in autumn . they are small , roughly triangular and edible , with a bitter , astringent , or in some cases , mild and nut-like taste . according to the roman statesman pliny the elder in his work natural history , beechnut was eaten by the people of chios when the town was besieged , writing of the fruit : '' that of the beech is the sweetest of all ; so much so , that , according to cornelius alexander , the people of the city of chios , when besieged , supported themselves wholly on mast '' . the leaves can be steeped in liquor to give a light green/yellow liqueur . in antiquity , the bark of beech tree were used by indo-european people for writing-related purposes , especially in religious context . beech wood tablets were a common writing material in germanic societies before the development of paper . the old english bōc a concise anglo-saxon dictionary , second edition ( 1916 ) , blōtan-boldwela , john richard clark hall has the primary sense of '' beech '' but also a secondary sense of '' book '' , and it is from bōc that the modern word derives . in modern german , the word for '' book '' is buch , with buche meaning '' beech tree '' . in modern dutch , the word for '' book '' is boek , with beuk meaning '' beech tree '' . in swedish , these words are the same , bok meaning both '' beech tree '' and '' book '' . similarly , in russian and bulgarian , the word for beech is бук ( buk ) , while that for '' letter '' ( as in a letter of the alphabet ) is буква ( bukva ) . the pigment bistre was made from beech wood soot . beech litter raking as a replacement for straw in animal husbandry was an old non-timber practice in forest management that once occurred in parts of switzerland in the 17th century . beech has been listed as one of the 38 plants whose flowers are used to prepare bach flower remedies . . as an ornamental . the beech most commonly grown as an ornamental tree is the european beech ( fagus sylvatica ) , widely cultivated in north america and its native europe . many varieties are in cultivation , notably the weeping beech f . sylvatica 'pendula ' , several varieties of copper or purple beech , the fern-leaved beech f . sylvatica 'asplenifolia ' , and the tricolour beech f . sylvatica 'roseomarginata ' . the columnar dawyck beech ( f . sylvatica 'dawyck ' ) occurs in green , gold , and purple forms , named after dawyck botanic garden in the scottish borders , one of the four garden sites of the royal botanic garden edinburgh .