John Arbuthnot

biography . in his mid-life , arbuthnot , complaining of the work of edmund curll , among others , who commissioned and invented a biography as soon as an author died , said , '' biography is one of the new terrors of death , '' and so a biography of arbuthnot is made difficult by his own reluctance to leave records . alexander pope noted to joseph spence that arbuthnot allowed his infant children to play with , and even burn , his writings . throughout his professional life , arbuthnot exhibited a strong humility and social conviviality , and his friends often complained that he did not take sufficient credit for his own work . arbuthnot was born in arbuthnot , kincardineshire , on the north-eastern coast of scotland , son of rev alexander arbuthnot , an episcopalian priest and margaret , née lammie . he may have graduated with an arts degree from marischal college in 1685 . where john 's brothers took part in jacobite causes in 1689 , he remained with his father . these brothers included robert , who fled after fighting for king james vii in 1689 and became a banker in rouen and half-brother george , who fled to france and became a wine merchant . however , when william and mary came to the throne and the scottish and english parliaments required all ministers to swear allegiance to them as king and queen , arbuthnot 's father did not comply . as a non-juror , he was removed from his church , and john was there to take care of affairs when , in 1691 , his father died . arbuthnot went to london in 1691 , where he is supposed to have supported himself by teaching mathematics ( which had been his formal course of study ) . he lodged with william pate , whom swift knew and called a '' bel esprit '' . he published of the laws of chance in 1692 , translated from christiaan huygens 's de ratiociniis in ludo aleae . this was the first work on probability published in english . the work , which applied the field of probability to common games , was a success , and arbuthnot became the private tutor of one edward jeffreys , son of jeffrey jeffreys , an mp . he remained jeffreys 's tutor when the latter attended university college , oxford in 1694 , and he there met the variety of scholars then teaching mathematics and medicine , including dr john radcliffe , isaac newton , and samuel pepys . however , arbuthnot lacked the money to be a full-time student and was already well educated , although informally . he went to the university of st andrews and enrolled as a doctoral student in medicine on 11 september 1696 . the very same day he defended seven theses on medicine and was awarded the doctorate . he first wrote satire in 1697 , when he answered dr john woodward 's an essay towards a natural history of the earth and terrestrial bodies , especially minerals . with an examination of dr woodward 's account & c . he poked fun at the arrogance of the work and woodward 's misguided , aristotle insistence that what is theoretically attractive must be actually true . in 1701 , arbuthnot wrote another mathematical work , an essay on the usefulness of mathematical learning , in a letter from a gentleman in the city to his friend in oxford . the work was moderately successful , and arbuthnot praises mathematics as a method of freeing the mind from superstition . in 1702 , he was at epsom when prince george of denmark , husband of queen anne fell ill . according to tradition , arbuthnot treated the prince successfully . according to tradition again , this treatment earned him an invitation to court . also around 1702 , he married margaret , whose maiden name is possibly wemyss . although there are no baptismal records , it seems that his first son , george ( named in honour of the prince ) , was born in 1703 . he was elected to be a fellow of the royal society in 1704 . also thanks to the queen 's presence , he was made an md at cambridge university on 16 april 1705 . arbuthnot was an amiable individual , and swift said that the only fault an enemy could lay upon him was a slight waddle in his walk . his conviviality and his royal connections made him an important figure in the royal society . in 1705 , arbuthnot became physician extraordinary to queen anne , and at the same time was put on the board trying to publish the historia coelestius . newton and edmund halley wanted it published immediately , to support their work on orbits , while john flamsteed , the royal astronomer whose observations they were , wanted to keep the data secret until he had perfected it . the result was that arbuthnot used his leverage as friend and physician to prince george , whose money was paying for the publication , to force flamsteed to allow it out , albeit with serious errors , in 1712 . also as a scholar , arbuthnot took up an interest in antiquities and published tables of grecian , roman , and jewish measures , weights and coins ; reduced to the english standard in 1705 , 1707 , 1709 , and , expanded with a preface ( which indicated that his second son , charles , was born in 1705 ) , in 1727 and 1747 . although arbuthnot was not a jacobite after the fashion of his brothers , he was a tory , for national and familial reasons . anne was advised ( and many said controlled ) by sarah churchill , duchess of marlborough , who was a champion of whig causes . in 1706 , the duchess of marlborough fell out with anne—a schism which the tories were pleased to encourage . the marriage of lady-in-waiting abigail hill to samuel masham , which was the first overt sign of anne 's displeasure with sarah churchill , took place in arbuthnot 's apartments at st . james 's palace . the reasons for the choice of apartment and the degree of involvement of arbuthnot in either the love match or anne 's estrangement , are not clear . as a scotsman , arbuthnot served the crown by writing a sermon preach 'd to the people at the mercat cross of edinborough on the subject of the union . ecclesiastes , chapter 10 , verse 27 . the work was designed to persuade scots to accept the act of union . when the act passed , arbuthnot was made a fellow of the royal college of physicians of edinburgh . he was also made a in ordinary to the queen , which made him part of the royal household . arbuthnot returned to mathematics in 1710 with an argument for divine providence , taken from the constant regularity observed in the births of both sexes ( linked below ) in the royal society 's philosophical transactions . in this paper , arbuthnot examined birth records in london for each of the 82 years from 1629 to 1710 and the human sex ratio at birth : in every year , the number of males born in london exceeded the number of females . if the probability of male and female birth were equal , the probability of the observed outcome would be 1/2 82 , a vanishingly small number . this is vanishingly small , leading arbuthnot that this was not due to chance , but to divine providence : '' from whence it follows , that it is art , not chance , that governs . '' this paper was a landmark in the history of statistics ; in modern terms he performed statistical hypothesis testing , computing the p-value ( via a sign test ) , interpreted it as statistical significance , and rejected the null hypothesis . this is credited as '' … the first use of significance tests … '' , the first example of reasoning about statistical significance and moral certainty , and '' … perhaps the first published report of a nonparametric test … '' . . as a scriblerian . in 1710 , jonathan swift moved to london . with robert harley , 1st earl of oxford ( who was then the secretary of the treasury and not a peer ) , he produced the tory examiner , and arbuthnot made their acquaintance and began to provide '' hints '' to them . these '' hints '' were ideas for essays , satirical gambits , and facts , rather than secrets of any sort . from 1711 to 1713 , arbuthnot and swift formed '' the brothers ' club , '' though arbuthnot characteristically gave away his ideas and even his writings , never seeking credit for them . in 1712 , arbuthnot and swift both attempted to aid the tory government of harley and henry st . john in their efforts to end the war of the spanish succession . the war had profited john and sarah churchill , and the tory ministry sought to end it by withdrawing from all england 's alliances and negotiating directly with france . swift wrote the conduct of the allies , and arbuthnot wrote a series of five pamphlets featuring john bull . the first of these , law is a bottomless pit ( 1712 ) , introduced a simple allegory to explain the war . john bull ( england ) is suing louis baboon ( i.e . louis bourbon , or louis xiv of france ) over the estate of the dead lord strutt ( charles ii of spain ) . bull 's lawyer is the one who really enjoys the suit , and he is humphrey hocus ( marlborough ) . bull has a sister named peg ( scotland ) . the pamphlets are swiftian in their satire , in that they make all of the characters hopelessly flawed and comic and none of their endeavour worth pursuing ( which was arbuthnot 's intent , as he sought to make the war an object of scorn ) , but it is filled with homespun humour , a common touch , and a sympathy for the figures that is distinctly non-swiftian . in 1713 , arbuthnot continued his political satire with proposals for printing a very curious discourse . a treatise of the art of political lying , with an abstract of the first volume . as with other works that arbuthnot encouraged , this systemizes a rhetoric of bad thinking and writing . he proposes to teach people to lie well . similar lists and systems are in alexander pope 's peri bathos and john gay and pope 's memoirs of martinus scriblerus . also in 1713 , arbuthnot was made a physician of chelsea hospital , which provided him with a house . it was this house that hosted the meetings of the scriblerus club , which had as its members harley ( now earl of oxford ) , st . john ( now viscount bolingbroke ) , pope , gay , swift , and thomas parnell . according to all the members of the club , arbuthnot was the one who contributed the most in ideas , and he was the only source they could draw upon when satirizing the sciences , and his was the idea for the memoirs of martinus scriblerus , a pedantic man who , like arbuthnot 's earlier opponent , dr woodward , would read three or four lines of classical literature and deduce a universal ( and absurd ) truth from them . the club met for only a year , for anne died in july 1714 , and the club met for the last time in november of that year . when anne died , she had no will . consequently , all her servants were left without positions and entirely at the mercy of the next administration — an administration that was chosen by the enemies of arbuthnot and the other scriblerans . when george i came to the throne , arbuthnot lost all of his royal appointments and houses , but he still had a vigorous medical practice . he lived at '' the second door from the left in dover street '' in piccadilly . life under the hanoverians . in 1717 , arbuthnot contributed somewhat to pope and gay 's play , three hours after marriage , which ran for seven nights . he was a friend to george frederic handel and appointed director to the royal academy of music ( 1719 ) from the start in 1719 till 1729 . in 1719 he took part in a pamphlet war over the treatment of smallpox . in particular , he attacked dr woodward , who had again presented a dogmatic and , arbuthnot thought , irrational opinion . in 1723 , arbuthnot was made one of the censors of the royal college of physicians , and as such he was one of the campaigners to inspect and improve the drugs sold by apothecaries in london . in 1723 , the apothecaries sued the rcp , and arbuthnot wrote reasons humbly offered by the . upholders ( undertakers ) against part of the bill for the better viewing , searching , and examining of drugs . the pamphlet suggested that the funeral directors of london might wish to sue the royal college of physicians as well to ensure that drug safety remained poor . in 1727 , he was made an elect of the royal college of physicians . in 1726 and 1727 , jonathan swift and alexander pope reunited at arbuthnot 's house during visits , and swift showed arbuthnot the manuscript of gulliver 's travels ahead of time . the detailed parody of on-going royal society projects in book iii of gulliver 's travels likely came from '' hints '' from arbuthnot . the visit also bore fruit in pope 's the dunciad of 1729 ( the second edition ) , where arbuthnot probably wrote the '' virgilius restauratus '' satirizing richard bentley . arbuthnot was guardian to peter the wild boy on his first arrival in london . in 1730 , arbuthnot 's wife died . the next year , he produced a work of popular medicine , an essay concerning the nature of aliments , and the choice of them , according to the different constitutions of human bodies . the book was quite popular , and a second edition , with advice on diet , came out the next year . it had four more full editions and translations into french and german . in 1733 he wrote another very popular work of medicine called an essay concerning the effects of air on human bodies . as with the former work , it went through multiple editions and translations . he argued that the air itself had to have enormous effects on the personality and persons of humanity , and he believed that the air of locations resulted in the characteristics of the people , as well as particular maladies . he advised his readers to ventilate sickrooms and to seek fresh air in cities . although the idea that airs carried sickness was incorrect , the practical upshot of arbuthnot 's advice was efficacious , as crowded , poorly sanitized augustan era cities had bad air and infectious air . his son charles , studying to be a divine at christ church , oxford , died in 1731 , the same year that the swift and pope miscellanies , volume the third ( which was the first volume ) appeared . he contributed '' an essay of the learned martinus scriblerus concerning the origine of the sciences '' to the volume . in 1734 , his health began to decline . he had kidney stones and asthma , and he was also obesity . on 17 july 1734 , arbuthnot wrote to pope to tell him that he had a terminal illness . in a response dated 2 august , pope indicates that he planned to write more satire , and on 25 august told arbuthnot that he was going to address one of his epistles to him , later characterizing it as a memorial to their friendship . arbuthnot died at his house in cork street , in london on 27 february 1735 , eight weeks after the poem '' epistle to dr arbuthnot '' was published . rogers , the alexander pope encyclopedia , p . 110 ; baines , the complete critical guide to alexander pope ( routledge , 2000 ) , p . 37 . he is buried at st james 's church , piccadilly . literary significance . arbuthnot was one of the founding members of the scriblerus club , and was regarded by the other wits of the group as the funniest , but he left fewer literary remains than the other members . his satires are written with an ease , a humanity , and an apparent sympathy . swift and arbuthnot had similar styles in language ( both preferred direct sentences and clear vocabulary ) with a feigned frenzy of lists and taxonomies , and sometimes their works are attributed to each other . the treatise on political lying , for example , has been attributed to swift in the past , although it was definitely arbuthnot 's . generally , arbuthnot 's writings are not as vicious or nihilistic as swift 's , but they attack the same targets and both refuse to hold up a set of positive norms for their readers . because of arbuthnot 's own insistence on not being recognized , it is difficult to speak definitively of his literary significance . dr . johnson describes him as the 'most universal genius ' 'life and works ' , ed g.a . aitken 1892 and we know that he was at the heart of many of the greatest satires of his age . he was a conduit and source for a great many of the finest literary accomplishments for over half a century of writing , but arbuthnot was zealous that he not receive credit . bibliography . arbuthnot 's collected works , available on line . . works . john arbuthnot ( 1712 , published in 1727 ) . the history of john bull . john arbuthnot ( 1722 ) . mr . maitland ’ s account of inoculating the small-pox , london , printed for the author , by j . downing . ( transcription in eighteenth century collections online ) . john arbuthnot ( 1733 ) . iarchive : essayconcerninge00arbu , london , printed for j . tonson in the strand . ( transcription in eighteenth century collections online ) . john arbuthnot ( 1727 ) . tables of ancient coins , weights and measures . explain 'd and exemplify 'd in several dissertations . , london : printed for j . tonson , 1727 . . references . sources . anderson , william , john arbuthnot , m.d . , in the scottish nation , edinburgh , 1867 , vol.1 , pps:146-151 . ross , angus , john arbuthnot in matthew , h.c.g . , and brian harrison ( eds . ) , oxford dictionary of national biography , vol . 2 , 325 & ndash ; 329 . london : oxford university press , 2004 . further reading . . external links . john arbuthnot at the eighteenth-century poetry archive ( ecpa ) s : epitaph on don francisco concerning dr john arbuthnot 's images arbuthnot family tree arbuthnot 's actutor biography the art of political lying arbuthnot and gullivers travels '' longitude forged '' : an essay exposing a hoax solution to the problem of calculating longitude , undetected in dava sobel 's longitude , from tls , 12 november 2008 .