a radio direction finder ( rdf ) is a device for finding the direction , or bearing , to a radio source . the act of measuring the direction is known as radio direction finding or sometimes simply direction finding ( df ) . using two or more measurements from different locations , the location of an unknown transmitter can be determined ; alternately , using two or more measurements of known transmitters , the location of a vehicle can be determined . rdf is widely used as a radio navigation system , especially with boats and aircraft . rdf systems can be used with any radio source , although the size of the receiver antennas are a function of the wavelength of the signal ; very long wavelengths ( low frequencies ) require very large antennas , and are generally used only on ground-based systems . these wavelengths are nevertheless very useful for marine navigation as they can travel very long distances and '' over the horizon '' , which is valuable for ships when the line-of-sight may be only a few tens of kilometres . for aircraft , where the horizon at altitude may extend to hundreds of kilometres , higher frequencies can be used , allowing much smaller antennas . an automatic direction finder , often capable of being tuned to commercial am radio transmitters , is a feature of almost all modern aircraft . for the military , rdf systems are a key component of signals intelligence systems and methodologies . the ability to locate the position of an enemy transmitter has been invaluable since world war i , and it played a key role in world war ii 's battle of the atlantic . it is estimated that the uk 's advanced '' huff-duff '' systems were directly or indirectly responsible for 24 % of all u-boats sunk during the war . a paper on the technology and practice of the hf/df systems used by the royal navy against u-boats in world war ii modern systems often use phased array antennas to allow rapid beam forming for highly accurate results . these are generally integrated into a wider electronic warfare suite . several distinct generations of rdf systems have been used over time , following new developments in electronics . early systems used mechanically rotated antennas that compared signal strengths from different directions , and several electronic versions of the same concept followed . modern systems use the comparison of phase or doppler effect which are generally simpler to automate . modern pseudo-doppler direction finder systems consist of a number of small antennas fixed to a circular card , with all of the processing performed by software . early british radar sets were also referred to as rdf , which was a deception tactic . however , the terminology was not inaccurate ; the chain home systems used separate omnidirectional broadcasters and large rdf receivers to determine the location of the targets .