dexter gordon ( february 27 , 1923 – april 25 , 1990 ) was an american jazz tenor saxophonist . he was among the most influential early bebop musicians , which included other greats such as charlie parker , dizzy gillespie , and bud powell . gordon 's height was , so he was also known as '' long tall dexter '' and '' sophisticated giant '' . his studio and performance career spanned over 40 years . gordon 's sound was commonly characterized as being '' large '' and spacious and he had a tendency to play behind the beat . he was known for inserting musical quotes into his solos , with sources as diverse as '' happy birthday '' and well known melodies from the operas of wagner . this is not unusual in jazz improvisation , but gordon did it frequently enough to make it a hallmark of his style . one of his major influences was lester young . gordon , in turn , was an early influence on john coltrane and sonny rollins . rollins and coltrane then influenced gordon 's playing as he explored hard bop and modal playing during the 1960s . gordon was known for his genial and humorous stage presence . he was an advocate of playing to communicate with the audience , which was his musical approach as well . his improvisation was remarkably engaging and intelligent , but never gratuitously complex or unusual . it was always a conversation simultaneously delightful and intellectual . one of his idiosyncratic rituals was to recite lyrics from each ballad before playing it . a photograph by herman leonard of gordon taking a smoke break at the royal roost in 1948 is one of the iconic images in jazz photography . cigarettes were a recurring theme on covers of gordon 's albums . gordon was nominated for an academy award for academy award for best actor for his performance in the bertrand tavernier film round midnight ( warner bros , 1986 ) , and he won a grammy for best jazz instrumental performance , soloist , for the soundtrack album the other side of round midnight ( blue note records , 1986 ) . he also had a cameo role in the 1990 film awakenings . in 2018 , gordon 's album go ( blue note , 1962 ) was selected by the library of congress for preservation in the national recording registry for being '' culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant '' .