cegep or ; ; also cégep , cegep or cégep is a publicly funded higher education pre‑university , collegiate technical college exclusive to the province of quebec education system . a loanword from french , it originates from the french acronym for , sometimes known in english as a '' general and vocational college '' , it is now considered a word in itself . although all colleges in quebec are colloquially referred to as cegeps , only public colleges are officially referred to by that name . both public ( cegeps ) and private colleges have the same function in quebec . although they may occasionally be compared to junior colleges or community colleges , cegeps differ in that a diploma of college studies ( or , dec ) is required for university admission in quebec , unless a student enters as a mature student , which typically means a minimum age of 21 , with other requirements . a student in quebec typically can not enter university with only a secondary diploma , unless the diploma was earned in another province or country . however , some private english schools in quebec offer grade 12 which do allow access to university without needing to earn a dec . why do some private schools offer grade 12 ? pre-university programs are typically two years in duration , filling the gap between secondary school and undergraduate degrees , which are both one year shorter in quebec relative to elsewhere in canada . technical programs are typically three years in duration , with specialization in courses leading to a career right after graduation . depending on the university , students with dec diplomas from a technical program can continue their studies at a university for higher education . the purpose of a separate collegiate education level is to make post-secondary education more accessible in quebec . it also ensures that students have a proper academic preparation to succeed at university . there are both public subsidized and private colleges , with the public cegeps having little or no tuition fee . a product of the quiet revolution , the cegep system was started in 1967 by the government of quebec and originally consisted of 12 cegeps . today , 48 cegeps operate in quebec , of which five are in the english language . there are also college centres , small public post-secondary education colleges very similar to cegeps , often secondary stand alone campuses of cégeps , like the centre d'études collégiales à chibougamau , part of the cégep de saint-félicien .