floaters or eye floaters are sometimes visible deposits within the eye 's vitreous humour ( '' the vitreous '' ) , which is normally transparent , or between the vitreous and retina . cline d ; hofstetter hw ; griffin jr . dictionary of visual science . 4th ed . butterworth-heinemann , boston 1997 . each floater can be measured by its size , shape , consistency , refractive index , and motility . they are also called muscae volitantes ( latin for 'flying flies ' ) , or mouches volantes ( from the same phrase in french ) . the vitreous usually starts out transparent , but imperfections may gradually develop as one ages . the common type of floater , present in most people 's eyes , is due to these degenerative changes of the vitreous . the perception of floaters , which may be annoying or problematic to some people , is known as myodesopsia , from greek μυιώδης '' fly-like '' ( myiodes was also the name of a fly-deterring deity ) and ὄψις '' sight . '' or , less commonly , as myodaeopsia , myiodeopsia , or myiodesopsia . it is not often treated , except in severe cases , where vitrectomy ( surgery ) , floater laser , and medication may be effective . floaters are visible either because of the shadow imperfections cast on the retina , american academy of ophthalmology . '' floaters and flashes : a closer look '' ( pamphlet ) san francisco : aao , 2006 . or because of the refraction of light that passes through them , and can appear alone or together with several others as a clump in one 's visual field . they may appear as spots , threads , or fragments of '' cobwebs '' , which float slowly before the observer 's eyes , and move especially in the direction the eyes move . as these objects exist within the eye itself , they are not optical illusions but are entoptic phenomena ( caused by the eye itself ) . they are not to be confused with visual snow , which is similar to the tv static , although these two conditions may co-exist as part of a number of visual disturbances which include starbursts , trails , and palinopsia .