is the planck length . the fact that the black hole entropy is also the maximal entropy that can be obtained by the bekenstein bound ( wherein the bekenstein bound becomes an equality ) was the main observation that led to the holographic principle . an oversight in the application of the no-hair theorem is the assumption that the relevant degrees of freedom accounting for the entropy of the black hole must be classical in nature ; what if they were purely quantum mechanical instead and had non-zero entropy ? actually , this is what is realized in the lqg derivation of black hole entropy , and can be seen as a consequence of its background-independence – the classical black hole spacetime comes about from the semiclassical limit of the quantum state of the gravitational field , but there are many quantum states that have the same semiclassical limit . specifically , in lqg see list of loop quantum gravity researchers it is possible to associate a quantum geometrical interpretation to the microstates : these are the quantum geometries of the horizon which are consistent with the area , a , of the black hole and the topology of the horizon ( i.e . spherical ) . lqg offers a geometric explanation of the finiteness of the entropy and of the proportionality of the area of the horizon . these calculations have been generalized to rotating black holes . it is possible to derive , from the covariant formulation of full quantum theory ( spinfoam ) the correct relation between energy and area ( 1st law ) , the unruh temperature and the distribution that yields hawking entropy . the calculation makes use of the notion of dynamical horizon and is done for non-extremal black holes . a recent success of the theory in this direction is the computation of the entropy of all non singular black holes directly from theory and independent of immirzi parameter . the result is the expected formula s a/4 , where s is the entropy and a the area of the black hole , derived by bekenstein and hawking on heuristic grounds . this is the only known derivation of this formula from a fundamental theory , for the case of generic non singular black holes . older attempts at this calculation had difficulties . the problem was that although loop quantum gravity predicted that the entropy of a black hole is proportional to the area of the event horizon , the result depended on a crucial free parameter in the theory , the above-mentioned immirzi parameter . however , there is no known computation of the immirzi parameter , so it had to be fixed by demanding agreement with bekenstein and hawking 's calculation of the black hole entropy .