fiel a la vega is a rock en español band from puerto rico formed in 1994 . the band consisted of members tito auger and ricky laureano ( vocals and guitars ) , who come from the northern city of vega alta , puerto rico , along with brothers pedro and jorge arraiza ( drums and bass ) , who come from the neighboring city of vega baja . their hometown is what gave name to the band . since 1996 , they were joined by percussionist papo román , who left the band in 2006 to spend time with his family . the band rose to prominence with their eponymous debut album , which was released in 1996 . the album was a hit , spawning several hit singles like '' salimos de aquí '' and '' el wanabí '' , and turning the band into one of the most popular musical groups in the island at the moment . fiel a la vega followed their debut album with four more studio albums , three of which were released independently . despite not having the support of a multinational record label or wide publicity , after 20 years , the band is still considered by many as '' the most important rock band in the history of puerto rico '' . in recent years , the band has left the hectic production/gigging schedule , with its members being involved in personal projects . singer auger has been touring the island solo , and with a musical troupe called la banda acústica rodante , while guitarist laureano has been pursuing a solo career , while also touring the island with fellow guitarist joel rodríguez . brothers pedro and jorge continue to work as a professor and chef respectively , while also working on their own band , los arraiza voladores and featuring with the acoustic cover band good acoustics . in october 2016 the band performed at the coliseo of puerto rico to celebrate their 20th anniversary accompanied by former member papo román and keyboards played by francisco '' quito '' gonzález . the concert had an attendance of 7,000 people and lasted 3 and a half hours commemorating their two decades playing music .