petrópolis , los angeles , santa barbara , veracruz , rapallo , and new york city . as consul in madrid , she had occasional professional interactions with another chilean consul and nobel prize recipient , pablo neruda , and she was among the earlier writers to recognize the importance and originality of his work , which she had known while he was a teenager and she was school director in his hometown of temuco . she published hundreds of articles in magazines and newspapers throughout the spanish-speaking world . among her confidants were eduardo santos , president of colombia , all of the elected presidents of chile from 1922 to her death in 1957 , eduardo frei montalva , who would be elected president in 1964 , and eleanor roosevelt . the poet 's second major volume of poetry , tala , appeared in 1938 , published in buenos aires with the help of longtime friend and correspondent victoria ocampo . the proceeds for the sale were devoted to children orphaned by the spanish civil war . this volume includes many poems celebrating the customs and folklore of latin america as well as mediterranean europe . mistral uniquely fuses these locales and concerns , a reflection of her identification as '' una mestiza de vasco , '' her european basque-indigenous amerindian background . on 14 august 1943 , mistral 's 17-year-old nephew , juan miguel godoy , killed himself . mistral considered juan miguel as a son and she called him yin yin . the grief of this death , as well as her responses to tensions of world war ii and then the cold war in europe and the americas , are all reflected in the last volume of poetry published in her lifetime , lagar , which appeared in a truncated form in 1954 . a final volume of poetry , poema de chile , was edited posthumously by her partner doris dana and published in 1967 . poema de chile describes the poet 's return to chile after death , in the company of an indian boy from the atacama desert and an andes deer , the huemul . this collection of poetry anticipates the interests in objective description and re-vision of the epic tradition just then becoming evident among poets of the americas , all of whom mistral read carefully . on 15 november 1945 , mistral became the first latin american , and fifth woman , to receive the nobel prize in literature . she received the award in person from gustav v of sweden on 10 december 1945 . in 1947 she received a doctor honoris causa from mills college , oakland , california . in 1951 she was awarded the national literature prize in chile . poor health somewhat slowed mistral 's traveling . during the last years of her life she made her home in the town of roslyn , new york ; in early january 1957 she transferred to hempstead , new york , where she died from pancreatic cancer on 10 january 1957 , aged 67 . her remains were returned to chile nine days later . the chilean government declared three days of national mourning , and hundreds of thousands of mourners came to pay her their respects . some of mistral 's best known poems include piececitos de niño , balada , todas íbamos a ser reinas , la oración de la maestra , el ángel guardián , decálogo del artista and la flor del aire . she wrote and published some 800 essays in magazines and newspapers ; she was also a well-known correspondent and highly regarded orator both in person and over the radio . mistral may be most widely quoted in english for su nombre es hoy ( his name is today ) : : “ we are guilty of many errors and many faults , but our worst crime is abandoning the children , neglecting the fountain of life . many of the things we need can wait . the child can not . right now is the time his bones are being formed , his blood is being made , and his senses are being developed . to him we can not answer ‘ tomorrow , ’ his name is today . ”