image : heiligenverehrung.jpg thumb veneration in noto conrad of piacenza ( san corrado ) veneration ( latin veneratio , greek τιμάω , timao ) , or veneration of saints , is the act of honoring a saint , a person who has been identified as having a high degree of sanctity or holiness . angels are shown similar veneration in many religions . philology , '' to venerate '' derives from the latin verb , venerare , meaning 'to regard with reverence and respect ' . veneration of saints is practiced , formally or informally , by adherents of some branches of all major religions , including christianity , judaism , '' veneration of saints is a universal phenomenon . all monotheistic and polytheistic creeds contain something of its religious dimension . '' hinduism , islam , and buddhism . within christianity , veneration is practiced by groups such as the orthodox church , the roman catholic , and eastern catholic churches , all of which have varying types of canonization or glorification procedures . in the catholic and orthodox churches , veneration is shown outwardly by respectfully bowing or making the sign of the cross before a saint 's icon , relics , or statue , or by going on pilgrimage to sites associated with saints . in general , veneration is not practiced by protestants . hinduism has a long tradition of veneration of saints , expressed toward various gurus and teachers of sanctity , both living and dead . branches of buddhism include formal liturgical worship of saints , with mahayana buddhism classifying degrees of sainthood . in islam , veneration of saints is practiced by many of the adherents of traditional sunni islam ( sunni sufis , for example ) and shia islam , and in many parts of places like turkey , egypt , south asia , and southeast asia . other sects , such as wahhabists etc . , abhor the practice . in judaism , there is no classical or formal recognition of saints , but there is a long history of reverence shown toward biblical heroes and martyrs . in some regions , for example within judaism in morocco , there is a long and widespread tradition of saint veneration .