the irish republic or was a revolutionary state that declared its independence from the united kingdom in january 1919 . the republic claimed jurisdiction over the whole island of ireland , but by 1920 its functional control was limited to only 21 of counties of ireland , m.e . collins , ireland , p . 252 . and british state forces maintained a presence across much of the north-east , as well as cork , dublin and other major towns . the republic was strongest in rural areas , and through its military forces was able to influence the population in urban areas that it did not directly control . its origins date back to the easter rising of 1916 , when irish republicans seized key locations in dublin and proclaimed an irish republic . the rebellion was crushed , but the survivors united under a reformed sinn féin party to campaign for a republic . the party won a clear majority of largely uncontested seats in the 1918 general election , and formed the first dáil ( legislature ) of ireland in dublin on 21 january 1919 . republicans then established a government , a dáil courts and a police force . at the same time , the irish volunteers , who came under the control of the dáil and became known as the irish republican army , fought against british state forces in the irish war of independence . the war of independence ended with the anglo-irish treaty , signed on 6 december 1921 and narrowly approved by dáil éireann on 7 january 1922 . a provisional government was set up under the terms of the treaty , but the irish republic nominally remained in existence until 6 december 1922 , when 26 of the island 's 32 counties became a self-governing british dominion called the irish free state . the island had been partitioned by the government of ireland act 1920 , and the six counties of northern ireland , which had been partitioned so as to create and ensure a unionist majority , exercised their right under the treaty to opt out of the free state , and remain in the united kingdom . hachey , thomas e . et al . the irish experience : a concise history 1996 p172