the presidential primary elections and caucuses held in the various states , the washington , d.c . , and territories of the united states form part of the nominating process of candidates for united states presidential elections . the united states constitution has never specified the process ; political parties have developed their own procedures over time . some states hold only primary elections , some hold only caucuses , and others use a combination of both . these primaries and caucuses are staggered , generally beginning sometime in january or february , and ending about mid-june before the general election in november . state and local governments run the primary elections , while caucuses are private events that are directly run by the political parties themselves . a state 's primary election or caucus is usually an indirect election : instead of voters directly selecting a particular person running for president , they determine the number of delegates each party 's national convention will receive from their respective state . these delegates then in turn select their party 's presidential nominee . the first state in the united states to hold its presidential primary was north dakota in 1912 , following on oregon 's successful direct legislation league in 1910 . each party determines how many delegates it allocates to each state . along with those '' pledged '' delegates chosen during the primaries and caucuses , state delegations to both the democratic and republican conventions also include superdelegate who have a vote . for republicans , they consist of the three top party officials who serve at large from each state and territory . democrats have a more expansive group of unpledged delegates called '' superdelegates '' , who are party leaders and elected officials ( pleo ) . if no single candidate has secured an absolute majority of delegates ( including both pledged and unpledged ) , then a '' brokered convention '' occurs : all pledged delegates are '' released '' after the first round of voting and are able to switch their allegiance to a different candidate , and then additional rounds take place until there is a winner with an absolute majority . the staggered nature of the presidential primary season allows candidates to concentrate their resources in each area of the country one at a time instead of campaigning in every state simultaneously . in some of the less populous states , this allows campaigning to take place on a much more personal scale . however , the overall results of the primary season may not be representative of the u.s . electorate as a whole : voters in iowa , new hampshire and other less populous states which traditionally hold their primaries and caucuses in late-january/february usually have a major impact on the races , while voters in california and other large states which traditionally hold their primaries in june generally end up having no say because the races are usually over by then . as a result , more states vie for earlier primaries , known as '' front-loading '' , to claim a greater influence in the process . the national parties have used penalties and awarded bonus delegates in efforts to stagger the system over broadly a 90-day window . where state legislatures set the primary or caucus date , sometimes the out-party in that state has endured penalties in the number of delegates it can send to the national convention .