the kazon are a fictional race in the star trek franchise . developed by star trek : voyager series ' co-creators rick berman , michael piller , and jeri taylor , the kazon serve as the primary antagonists during the show 's first two seasons . they are represented as a nomadic species divided into eighteen separate sects , and characterized by their reliance on violence . a patriarchal society , the kazon have a low opinion of women , and place pride in men becoming warriors and proving themselves in battle . the kazon storylines frequently revolve around the attempts of jal culluh and his kazon sect to steal technology from the uss voyager , with the assistance of former voyager ensign seska . during the second season , the voyager crew uncover more about the alien species ' history and culture through a temporary truce . in their final major appearance , the kazon successfully commandeer voyager , but are eventually forced to surrender and retreat . the alien species have minor cameo appearances and references in the show 's subsequent seasons , and have also been included in star trek online and list of star trek novels . inspired by gangs like the crips and bloods , the kazon were seen by the show 's co-creators as an apt metaphor for the fears and anxieties surrounding cities and gangs during the seasons ' broadcast . the kazon were developed as one of three new alien species that could be expanded as recurring antagonists . the other two were the vidiians and the sikarians . michael westmore was the primary make-up supervisor involved in the creation of the kazon 's appearance . piller originally planned to cast young actors between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five exclusively , but decided to cast older and more experienced performers as they tested better during the audition process . voyager 's writing team dedicated a large portion of season two to the development of the alien species , with piller writing a paper on them that would be used for the development of the kazon-centric episodes . the kazon were removed from the series following the season three premiere as the co-creators felt that their continued presence would strain the credibility of voyager 's journey home . critical response to the kazon was generally negative . some reviewers praised their ability to capture voyager and maroon its crew on a desolate planet , while others felt they were poorly developed copies of klingons and that the second season focused too much on them . the kazon were included on several lists ranking the worst villains in star trek history , and were cited as an example of the racist implications in the franchise 's alien species . during her re-watching of the series , trektoday michelle erica green provided extensive criticism of the alien species , questioning the decision to feature them as the primary antagonists instead of the vidiians , and captain captain janeway 's refusal to share technology with them . the kazon were also poorly received by the show 's cast members , who did not find them to be strong villains or compelling additions to the narrative .