the battle of carillon , also known as the 1758 battle of ticonderoga , chartrand , p . 57 was fought on july 8 , 1758 , during the french and indian war ( which was part of the global seven years ' war ) . it was fought near fort carillon ( now known as fort ticonderoga ) on the shore of lake champlain in the frontier area between the british colony of new york and the french colony of new france . in the battle , which took place primarily on a rise about three-quarters of a mile ( one & nbsp ; km ) from the fort itself , a france army of about 3,600 men under general marquis de montcalm and the chevalier de levis decisively defeated an overwhelmingly numerically superior force of british troops under general james abercrombie , which frontally assaulted an entrenched french position without using field artillery , a lack that left the british and their allies vulnerable and allowed the french to win a decisive victory . the battle was the bloodiest of the american theater of the war , with over 3,000 casualties suffered . french losses were about 400 , while more than 2,000 were british . nester , p . 7 american historian lawrence henry gipson wrote of abercrombie 's campaign that '' no military campaign was ever launched on american soil that involved a greater number of errors of judgment on the part of those in positions of responsibility '' . gipson , p . 232 many military historians have cited the battle of carillon as a classic example of tactical military incompetence . abercrombie , confident of a quick victory , ignored several viable military options , such as flanking the french breastworks , waiting for his artillery , or laying siege to the fort . instead , relying on a flawed report from a young military engineer , and ignoring some of that engineer 's recommendations , he decided in favor of a direct frontal assault on the thoroughly entrenched french , without the benefit of artillery . montcalm , while concerned about the weak military position of the fort , conducted the defense with spirit . however , due in part to a lack of time , he committed strategic errors in preparing the area 's defenses that a competent attacker could have exploited , and he made tactical errors that made the attackers ' job easier . the fort , abandoned by its garrison , was battle of ticonderoga ( 1759 ) , and it has been known as fort ticonderoga ( after its location ) ever since . this battle gave the fort a reputation for impregnability that had an effect on future military operations in the area . there were several large-scale military movements through the area in both the french and indian war , as well as the american revolutionary war with the american capture of fort ticonderoga and the siege of fort ticonderoga ( 1777 ) , however this was the only major battle fought near the fort 's location .