rupert giles is a fictional character created by joss whedon for the television series buffy the vampire slayer . the character is portrayed by anthony head . he serves as buffy summers ' mentor and surrogate father figure . the character proved popular with viewers , and head 's performance in the role was well received . following buffys run , whedon intended to launch a television spin-off focused on the character , but rights issues prevented the project from developing . outside of the television series , the character has appeared substantially in expanded universe material such as novels , comic books , and short stories . giles ' primary role in the series is watcher to buffy ( sarah michelle gellar ) in her capacity as vampire slayer ; he is in the employ of the watchers ' council , a british organization that attempts to oversee the actions of the slayer . from youth , giles was expected to follow the family tradition and become a watcher , though as a teenager and young adult he rebelled , dropping out of oxford university to experiment in dark magic and the rock music scene , until a bereavement brought him to his senses . in adulthood , his loyalty to buffy and her group of friends costs him his job for a time . as the series progresses , giles increasingly becomes a father figure to buffy and her friends willow ( alyson hannigan ) and xander ( nicholas brendon ) . his encyclopedic knowledge , affinity for magic , moderate fighting skills and willingness to kill make him an asset to buffy in her fight against the supernatural evils that plague sunnydale . following buffys conclusion in 2003 , whedon intended to continue giles ' story as a spin-off series , ripper , which he intended to produce with the bbc . the series was to depict giles in ghost story set in present-day england , coping with loneliness as well as figurative ghosts from his own chequered past . over several years whedon restated his commitment to the project , though announced it would take the form of a one-off tv movie . despite head 's availability and the bbc 's willingness to fund the project , rights issues concerning the character ultimately led to it not developing further . canonically , the character 's story is continued in the comic book buffy the vampire slayer season eight ( 2007–2011 ) and subsequent stories . the season eight sequel angel & faith ( 2011– ) heavily features giles and utilizes ideas and characters from the proposed ripper spin-off .