computational geometry is a branch of computer science devoted to the study of algorithms which can be stated in terms of geometry . some purely geometrical problems arise out of the study of computational geometric algorithms , and such problems are also considered to be part of computational geometry . while modern computational geometry is a recent development , it is one of the oldest fields of computing with a history stretching back to antiquity . analysis of algorithms is central to computational geometry , with great practical significance if algorithms are used on very large datasets containing tens or hundreds of millions of points . for such sets , the difference between o ( n 2 ) and o ( n log n ) may be the difference between days and seconds of computation . the main impetus for the development of computational geometry as a discipline was progress in computer graphics and computer-aided design and manufacturing ( cad/cam ) , but many problems in computational geometry are classical in nature , and may come from mathematical visualization . other important applications of computational geometry include robotics ( motion planning and visibility problems ) , geographic information systems ( gis ) ( geometrical location and search , route planning ) , integrated circuit design ( ic geometry design and verification ) , computer-aided engineering ( cae ) ( mesh generation ) , computer vision ( 3d reconstruction ) . the main branches of computational geometry are : combinatorial computational geometry , also called algorithmic geometry , which deals with geometric objects as discrete entities . a groundlaying book in the subject by preparata and shamos dates the first use of the term '' computational geometry '' in this sense by 1975 . numerical computational geometry , also called machine geometry , computer-aided geometric design ( cagd ) , or geometric modeling , which deals primarily with representing real-world objects in forms suitable for computer computations in cad/cam systems . this branch may be seen as a further development of descriptive geometry and is often considered a branch of computer graphics or cad . the term '' computational geometry '' in this meaning has been in use since 1971 . a.r . forrest , '' computational geometry '' , proc . royal society london , 321 , series 4 , 187-195 ( 1971 )