by 2014 , a mitochondrial dna phylogeny including fossil members placed ostriches on the basal branch , followed by rheas , then a clade consisting of moas and tinamous , followed by the final two branches : a clade of emus plus cassowaries and one of elephant birds plus kiwis . vicariance based on the plate tectonic split-up of gondwana followed by continental drift would predict that the deepest phylogenetic split would be between african and all other ratites , followed by a split between south american and australo-pacific ratites , roughly as observed . however , the elephant bird–kiwi relation appears to require dispersal across oceans by flight , as apparently does the colonization of new zealand by the moa and possibly the back-dispersal of tinamous to south america , if the latter occurred . the phylogeny as a whole suggests not only multiple independent origins of flightlessness , but also of gigantism ( at least five times ) . gigantism in birds tends to be insular ; however , a ten-million-year-long window of opportunity for evolution of avian gigantism on continents may have existed following the cretaceous–paleogene extinction event , in which ratites were able to fill vacant herbivorous niches before mammals attained large size . some authorities , though , have been skeptical of the new findings and conclusions . kiwi and tinamous are the only palaeognath lineages not to evolve gigantism , perhaps because of competitive exclusion by giant ratites already present on new zealand and south america when they arrived or arose . the fact that new zealand has been the only land mass to recently support two major lineages of flightless ratites may reflect the absence of native mammals , which allowed kiwi to occupy a mammal-like nocturnal niche . however , various other landmasses such as south america and europe have supported multiple lineages of flightless ratites that evolved independently , undermining this competitive exclusion hypothesis . most recently , studies on genetic and morphological divergence and fossil distribution show that paleognaths as a whole probably had an origin in the northern hemisphere . early cenozoic northern hemisphere paleognaths such as lithornis , pseudocrypturus , paracathartes and palaeotis appear to be the most basal members of the clade . the various ratite lineages were probably descended from flying ancestors that independently colonised south america and africa from the north , probably initially in south america . from south america they could have traveled overland to australia via antarctica , ( by the same route marsupials are thought to have used to reach australia ) and then reached new zealand and madagascar via '' sweepstakes '' dispersals across the oceans . gigantism would have evolved subsequent to trans-oceanic dispersals .