stellar nucleosynthesis is the nucleosynthesis of chemical elements by nuclear fusion reactions within stars . stellar nucleosynthesis has occurred since the original creation of hydrogen , helium and lithium during the big bang . as a predictive power , it yields accurate estimates of the observed abundances of the elements . it explains why the observed abundances of elements change over time and why some elements and their isotopes are much more abundant than others . the theory was initially proposed by fred hoyle in 1946 , who later refined it in 1954 . further advances were made , especially to nucleosynthesis by neutron capture of the elements heavier than iron , by margaret and geoffrey burbidge , william alfred fowler and hoyle in their famous 1957 b2fh paper , which became one of the most heavily cited papers in astrophysics history . stars evolve because of changes in their composition ( the abundance of their constituent elements ) over their lifespans , first by hydrogen burning ( main sequence star ) , then helium ( red giant star ) , and progressively burning higher elements . however , this does not by itself significantly alter the abundances of elements in the universe as the elements are contained within the star . later in its life , a low-mass star will slowly eject its atmosphere via stellar wind , forming a planetary nebula , while a higher–mass star will eject mass via a sudden catastrophic event called a supernova . the term supernova nucleosynthesis is used to describe the creation of elements during the explosion of a massive star or white dwarf . the advanced sequence of burning fuels is driven by gravitational collapse and its associated heating , resulting in the subsequent burning of carbon , oxygen and silicon . however , most of the nucleosynthesis in the mass range ( from silicon to nickel ) is actually caused by the upper layers of the star supernova core collapse , creating a compressional shock wave rebounding outward . the shock front briefly raises temperatures by roughly 50 % , thereby causing furious burning for about a second . this final burning in massive stars , called explosive nucleosynthesis or supernova nucleosynthesis , is the final epoch of stellar nucleosynthesis . a stimulus to the development of the theory of nucleosynthesis was the discovery of variations in the abundance of the chemical elements universe . the need for a physical description was already inspired by the relative abundances of isotopes of the chemical elements in the solar system . those abundances , when plotted on a graph as a function of atomic number of the element , have a jagged sawtooth shape that varies by factors of tens of millions ( see history of nucleosynthesis theory ) . this suggested a natural process that is not random . a second stimulus to understanding the processes of stellar nucleosynthesis occurred during the 20th century , when it was realized that the energy released from nuclear fusion reactions accounted for the longevity of the sun as a source of heat and light .