image : rousseau therepastofthelion.jpg thumbnail 400px henri rousseau 's the repast of the lion ( circa 1907 ) , is an example of naïve art . naïve art is usually defined as visual art that is created by a person who lacks the formal education and training that a professional artist undergoes ( in anatomy , art history , technique , perspective , ways of seeing ) . when this aesthetic is emulated by a trained artist , the result is sometimes called primitivism , pseudo-naïve art , or faux naïve art . unlike folk art , naïve art does not necessarily derive from a distinct popular cultural context or tradition ; indeed , at least in the advanced economies and since the printing , awareness of the local fine art tradition has been inescapable , as it diffused through popular prints and other media . naïve artists are aware of '' fine art '' conventions such as graphical perspective and compositional conventions , but are unable to fully use them , or choose not to . by contrast , outsider art ( art brut ) denotes works from a similar context but which have only minimal contact with the mainstream art world . naïve art is recognized , and often imitated , for its childlike simplicity and frankness . paintings of this kind typically have a flat rendering style with a rudimentary expression of perspective . one particularly influential painter of '' naïve art '' was henri rousseau ( 1844–1910 ) , a french post-impressionist who was discovered by pablo picasso . the definition of the term , and its '' borders '' with neighbouring terms such as folk art and outsider art , has been a matter of some controversy . naïve art is a term usually used for the forms of fine art , such as paintings and sculptures , but made by a self-taught artist , while objects with a practical use come under folk art . but this distinction has been disputed . wertkin , gerard c . ( 2004 ) . '' introduction '' . in wertkin , gerald c . encyclopedia of american folk art . new york , london : routledge . pp . xxxiv–xxxvi . another term that may be used , especially of paintings and architecture , is '' provincial '' , essentially used for work by artists who had received some conventional training , but whose work unintentionally falls short of metropolitan or court standards .