industrial archaeology ( ia ) is the systematic study of material evidence associated with the industrial past . industrial archaeology : principles and practice , peter neaverson and marilyn palmer , routledge , 1998 , chapter 1 this evidence , collectively referred to as industrial heritage , includes buildings , machinery , artifacts , sites , infrastructure , documents and other items associated with the production , manufacture , extraction , transport or construction of a product or range of products . the field of industrial archaeology incorporates a range of disciplines including archaeology , architecture , construction , engineering , historic preservation , museology , technology , urban planning and other specialties , in order to piece together the history of past industrial activities . the scientific interpretation of material evidence is often necessary , as the written record of many industrial techniques is often incomplete or nonexistent . industrial archaeology includes both the examination of standing structures and sites that must be studied by an excavation . the texture of industry , robert b . gordon and patrick m . malone , oxford university press , 1994 , chapter 1 the field of industrial archaeology developed during the 1950s in great britain , at a time when many historic industrial sites and artifacts were being lost throughout that country , including the notable case of euston arch in london . in the 1960s and 1970s , with the rise of national cultural heritage movements , industrial archaeology grew as a distinct form of archaeology , with a strong emphasis on preservation , first in great britain , and later in the united states and other parts of the world . during this period , the first organized national industrial heritage inventories were begun , including the industrial monuments survey in england and the historic american engineering record in the united states . additionally , a number of regional and national ia organizations were established , including the north american-based society for industrial archeology in 1971 , and the british-based association for industrial archaeology in 1973 . that same year , the first international conference on the conservation of industrial monuments was held at ironbridge in shropshire . this conference led , in 1978 , to the formal establishment of the international committee for the conservation of the industrial heritage ( commonly known as '' ticcih '' ) as a worldwide organization for the promotion of industrial heritage . the members of these and other ia groups are generally a diverse mix of professionals and amateurs who share a common interest in promoting the study , appreciation and preservation of industrial heritage resources .