bulimia nervosa , also known as simply bulimia , is an eating disorder characterized by binge eating followed by purging . binge eating refers to eating a large amount of food in a short amount of time . purging refers to the attempts to get rid of the food consumed . this may be done by vomiting or taking laxatives . other efforts to lose weight may include the use of diuretics , stimulants , water fasting , or excessive exercise . most people with bulimia are at a normal weight . the forcing of vomiting may result in russell 's sign and breakdown of the teeth . bulimia is frequently associated with other mental disorders such as depression , anxiety , and problems with drugs or alcohol . there is also a higher risk of suicide and self-harm . bulimia is more common among those who have a close relative with the condition . the percentage risk that is estimated to be due to genetics is between 30 % and 80 % . other risk factors for the disease include psychological stress , cultural pressure to attain a certain body type , poor self-esteem , and obesity . living in a culture that promotes dieting and having parents that worry about weight are also risks . diagnosis is based on a person 's medical history ; however , this is difficult , as people are usually secretive about their binge eating and purging habits . further , the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa takes precedence over that of bulimia . other similar disorders include binge eating disorder , kleine-levin syndrome , and borderline personality disorder . cognitive behavioral therapy is the primary treatment for bulimia . antidepressants of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor ( ssri ) or tricyclic antidepressant classes may have a modest benefit . while outcomes with bulimia are typically better than in those with anorexia , the risk of death among those affected is higher than that of the general population . at 10 years after receiving treatment about 50 % of people are fully recovered . globally , bulimia was estimated to affect 3.6 million people in 2015 . about 1 % of young women have bulimia at a given point in time and about 2 % to 3 % of women have the condition at some point in their lives . the condition is less common in the developing world . bulimia is about nine times more likely to occur in women than men . among women , rates are highest in young adults . bulimia was named and first described by the british psychiatrist gerald russell in 1979 .