the račak massacre or račak operation was the mass killing of 45 kosovo albanians that took place in the village of račak in central kosovo in january 1999 . the massacre was prompted by albanian separatist activity in the region , and perpetrated by serbian security forces . the serbian government refused to let a war crimes prosecutor visit the site , and maintained that the casualties were all members of the rebel kosovo liberation army ( kla ) killed in combat with state security forces . the killings were investigated by two separate forensic teams , the first a joint yugoslav–belarusian team and the second an external finland team representing the eu . the first team 's report , which was commissioned by the yugoslav government , concluded that those killed , who included a woman and 12-year-old child , were all separatist guerrillas and not civilians . the findings of the second team , however , sharply contradicted the yugoslav investigation 's report , determining that the deaths constituted killings of unarmed civilians . the lead finnish investigator , anthropology expert dr . helena ranta , called it a '' crime against humanity '' , though refusing as a scientist to directly label it a massacre or assign blame to any specific party . many of the details of the finnish team 's findings were left undisclosed for two years , for fear that they would negatively impact tribunal proceedings in the netherlands , seeking to punish yugoslavian president slobodan milošević for alleged war crimes . at the time , reporting of the incident varied from publication to publication and country to country . media outlets covering it more definitively described the event at račak as a gruesome terrorist atrocity by a repressive serbian government . bill clinton , then president of the united states , condemned the massacre as a deliberate and indiscriminate act of murder , and the administration launched a '' propaganda blitz '' in order to convince the american people that intervention in yugoslavia was necessary . public support for intervention among americans remained at only about 50 % , even after the extensive media attention of račak , denoting that war with yugoslavia would be significantly less popular than previous conflicts and interventions the us undertook in its recent history . regardless , the actions taken and bloodshed at račak represented a '' turning point in the war '' , drawing sympathy from several nations worldwide , and ultimately played a major role in nato 's decision to mount an organized military operation known as operation noble anvil against the federal republic of yugoslavia . nato 's involvement in the kosovo war in the months postdating the račak incident altogether lasted 78 days and consisted of a series of tactical airstrikes against critical targets of military or strategic import . the bombardments led to the deaths of possibly over 1,000 members of the yugoslavian security forces and several hundred civilians , as well as billions of dollars ' worth of public and private-sector damage to infrastructure , the deterioration of serbian leverage in kosovo , and a mass withdrawal of yugoslav forces from the region . a memorial exists to the victims of the massacre at račak . kosovo annually holds a ceremony to honour the victims of the massacre .