ulithi , , or '' ulithi '' . yapese dictionary : english finderlist . updated 27 july 2012 . retrieved 25 november 2013 . ) is an atoll in the caroline islands of the western pacific ocean , about east of yap . it consists of 40 islets totalling , surrounding a lagoon about long and up to wide—at one of the largest in the world . it is administered by the yap state in the federated states of micronesia . ulithi 's population was 773 in 2000 . there are four inhabited islands on ulithi atoll . they are falalop , asor ( yasor ) , mogmog ( mwagmwog ) , and fedarai ( fedraey ) . falalop is the most accessible with ulithi airport , a small resort hotel , store and one of three public high schools in yap state . mogmog is the seat of the high chief of ulithi atoll though each island has its own chief . other important islands are losiap , sorlen ( sohl'oay ) , and potangeras ( potoangroas ) . the atoll is in the westernmost of the caroline islands , southwest of guam , east of the philippines and south of tokyo . it is a typical volcanic atoll , with a coral reef , white sand beaches and palm trees . ulithi 's forty small islands barely rise above the sea , with the largest being only in area . however the reef runs roughly north and south , by across , enclosing a vast anchorage with an average depth of . ulithi was a major staging area for the united states navy in the final year of the second world war . several sunken warships rest at the bottom of the ulithi lagoon , including , a fleet oiler which sank fully loaded . the sunken oiler was found to be seeping oil into the lagoon . the united states navy responded , locating the oiler , tapping her storage tanks , and pumped off her oil . the cleanup operation was completed in february 2003 . given permission from the local community , the atoll offers good diving . reef damage from typhoon maysak in 2015 is still visible in places , but the reefs have largely recovered . census records can be misleading because population can fluctuate during the year because it is common for ulithians to leave for work or school abroad and to return . this is particularly true during festive times like the outer island high school graduation ceremony , when the population can increase considerably . additionally , during events like weddings and funerals , community populations may double . electricity is now available on some islands , and the advent of video players and cell phones have brought a touch of the outside world to this very isolated atoll . occasional diving and adventure tours visit ulithi from yap .