the battle of trebbia or the napoleonic battle of the trebbia ( 17–20 june 1799 ) was fought near the trebbia river in northern italy between the joint russian and habsburg army under alexander suvorov and the republican french army of jacques macdonald . though the opposing armies were approximately equal in numbers , the austro-russians severely defeated the french , sustaining about 6,000 casualties while inflicting losses of 12,000 to 16,500 on their enemies . the war of the second coalition engagement occurred west of piacenza , a city located southeast of milan . in the spring of 1799 the habsburg and russian armies ousted the french from much of northern italy after the battles of magnano and cassano and they placed the key fortress of mantua under siege . assembling the french occupation forces of southern and central italy into an army , macdonald moved north to challenge his enemies . rather than playing safe by moving along the west coast road , macdonald boldly chose to move east of the apennine mountains , hoping to be supported by jean victor marie moreau 's french army . after brushing aside a much smaller austrian force at modena , macdonald 's army swept west along the south bank of the po river . suvorov swiftly concentrated his russians and the allied austrians of michael von melas to block the french move . on 17 july , the leading french divisions bumped into a holding force led by peter karl ott von bátorkéz along the tidone river . ott was rapidly reinforced by the bulk of the austro-russian army and the french pulled back to the trebbia . suvorov attacked on the 18th but the outnumbered french managed to hold off the allied drive . on 19 june macdonald 's entire army was concentrated and he ordered an attack which was poorly coordinated and repulsed at all points . realizing that assistance from moreau was not forthcoming , that night macdonald ordered the beaten french army to slip away to the south and west . on the 20th the allies overran a french demi brigade acting as rear guard . instead of bringing a powerful reinforcement to the hard-pressed french in northwest italy , only the crippled remains of macdonald 's army arrived . due to participation of some 3,000 soldiers of the polish legions , the battle of trebbia is commemorated on the tomb of the unknown soldier , warsaw , with the inscription '' trebbia 17 - 19 vi 1799 '' .