in biology , coevolution occurs when two or more species reciprocally affect each other 's evolution through the process of natural selection . the term sometimes is used for two traits in the same species affecting each other 's evolution , as well as gene-culture coevolution . charles darwin mentioned evolutionary interactions between flowering plants and insects in on the origin of species ( 1859 ) . although he did not use the word coevolution , he suggested how plants and insects could evolve through reciprocal evolutionary changes . naturalists in the late 1800s studied other examples of how interactions among species could result in reciprocal evolutionary change . beginning in the 1940s , plant pathologists developed breeding programs that were examples of human-induced coevolution . development of new crop plant varieties that were resistant to some diseases favored rapid evolution in pathogen populations to overcome those plant defenses . that , in turn , required the development of yet new resistant crop plant varieties , producing an ongoing cycle of reciprocal evolution in crop plants and diseases that continues to this day . coevolution as a major topic for study in nature expanded rapidly after the middle 1960s , when daniel h . janzen showed coevolution between acacias and ants ( see below ) and paul r . ehrlich and peter h . raven suggested how escape and radiate coevolution may have contributed to the diversification of species in both groups . the theoretical underpinnings of coevolution are now well-developed ( e.g . , the geographic mosaic theory of coevolution ) , and demonstrate that coevolution can play an important role in driving major evolutionary transitions such as the evolution of sexual reproduction or shifts in ploidy . more recently , it has also been demonstrated that coevolution can influence the structure and function of ecological communities , the evolution of groups of mutualists such as plants and their pollinators , and the dynamics of infectious disease . each party in a coevolutionary relationship exerts selective pressures on the other , thereby affecting each other 's evolution . coevolution includes many forms of mutualism , host-parasite , and predation relationships between species , as well as competition within or between species . in many cases , the selective pressures drive an evolutionary arms race between the species involved . pairwise or specific coevolution , between exactly two species , is not the only possibility ; in multi-species coevolution , which is sometimes called guild or diffuse coevolution , several to many species may evolve a trait or a group of traits in reciprocity with a set of traits in another species , as has happened between the flowering plants and pollinator insects such as bees , fly , and beetles . there are a suite of specific hypotheses on the mechanisms by which groups of species coevolve with each other . coevolution is primarily a biological concept , but researchers have applied it by analogy to fields such as computer science , sociology , and astronomy .