the watt steam engine , alternatively known as the boulton and watt steam engine , was an early steam engine and was one of the driving forces of the industrial revolution . james watt developed the design sporadically from 1763 to 1775 with support from matthew boulton . watt 's design saved so much more fuel compared with earlier designs that they were licensed based on the amount of fuel they would save . watt never ceased developing the steam engine , introducing double-acting designs ( with two cylinders ) and various systems for taking off rotary power . watt 's design became synonymous with steam engines , and it was many years before significantly new designs began to replace the basic watt design . the first steam engines , introduced by thomas newcomen in 1712 , were of the '' atmospheric '' design . at the end of the power stroke , the weight of the object being moved by the engine , pulled the piston to the top of the cylinder , as steam was introduced . then the cylinder was cooled by a spray of water , which caused the steam to condense , forming a partial vacuum in the cylinder . atmospheric pressure on the top of the piston pushed it down , lifting the work object . watt noticed that it required significant amounts of heat to warm the cylinder back up to the point where steam could enter the cylinder without immediately condensing . when the cylinder was warm enough that it became filled with steam the next power stroke could commence . watt realised that the heat needed to warm the cylinder could be saved by adding a separate condensing cylinder . after the power cylinder was filled with steam , a valve was opened to the secondary cylinder , allowing the steam to flow into it and be condensed , which drew the steam from the main cylinder causing the power stroke . the condensing cylinder was water cooled to keep the steam condensing . at the end of the power stroke , the valve was closed so the power cylinder could be filled with steam as the piston moved to the top . the end result was the same cycle as newcomen 's design , but without any cooling of the power cylinder which was immediately ready for another stroke . watt worked on the design over a period of several years , introducing the condenser , and introducing improvements to practically every part of the design . notably , watt performed a lengthy series of trials on ways to seal the piston in the cylinder , which considerably reduced leakage during the power stroke , preventing power loss . all of these changes produced a more reliable design which used half as much coal to produce the same amount of power . the new design was introduced commercially in 1776 , with the first example sold to the carron company ironworks . watt continued working to improve the engine , and in 1781 introduced a system using a sun and planet gear to turn the linear motion of the engines into rotary motion . this made it useful not only in the original pumping role , but also as a direct replacement in roles where a water wheel would have been used previously . this was a key moment in the industrial revolution , since power sources could now be located anywhere instead of , as previously , needing a suitable water source and topography . boulton began developing a multitude of machines that made use of this rotary power , developing the first modern industrialized factory , the soho foundry , which in turn produced new steam engine designs . watt 's early engines were like the original newcomen designs in that they used low-pressure steam , and all of the power was produced by atmospheric pressure . when , in the early 1800s , other companies introduced high-pressure steam engines , watt was reluctant to follow suit due to safety concerns . wanting to improve on the performance of his engines , watt began considering the use of higher-pressure steam , as well as designs using multiple cylinders in both the double-acting concept and the multiple-expansion concept . these double-acting engines required the invention of the parallel motion , which allowed the piston rods of the individual cylinders to move in straight lines , keeping the piston true in the cylinder , while the walking beam end moved through an arc , somewhat analogous to a crosshead in later steam engines .