film is a 1965 short film written by samuel beckett , his only screenplay . it was commissioned by barney rosset of grove press . writing began on 5 april 1963 with a first draft completed within four days . a second draft was produced by 22 may and a 40-leaf shooting script followed thereafter . it was filmed in new york city in july 1964 . beckett and alan schneider originally wanted charlie chaplin , zero mostel and jack macgowran , however they eventually did not get involved . cited in alan schneider 's essay , '' on directing film '' in film by samuel beckett ( new york : grove press , 1969 ) , 66 . beckett then suggested buster keaton . schneider , a . , on directing samuel beckett ’ s film explains schneider : '' during a transatlantic call one day ( as i remember ) he shattered our desperation over the sudden casting crisis by calmly suggesting buster keaton . '' in print : schneider , '' on directing film '' ( grove , 1969 ) , 67 . james karen , who was to have a small part in the film , also supported having keaton . according to karen , he had urged schneider to consider the 68-year-old keaton when macgowran ’ s schedule changed , making him unavailable . brownlow , k . , ‘ brownlow on beckett ( on keaton ) ’ in filmwest 22 the filmed version differs from beckett 's original script but with his approval since he was on set all the time , this being his only visit to the united states , as stated in the script printed in collected shorter plays of samuel beckett ( faber and faber , 1984 ) . beckett , s . , collected shorter plays of samuel beckett ( london : faber and faber , 1984 ) , p 162 it was remade by the british film institute ( 1979 , 16 & nbsp ; mm , 26 minutes ) without beckett 's supervision , as film : a screenplay by samuel beckett . david rayner clark directed max wall . beckett did not approve of the finished product : “ it was awful . i was there when they were setting it all up and then i had to go with the director - what was his name ? - and i was very embarrassed . it was supposed to be silent with just the sound of feet and the one word '' ssh '' and he had every kind of noise going on . ” – brownlow , k . , ‘ brownlow on beckett ( on keaton ) ’ in filmwest 22 . a full review can be read at journal of beckett studies vol . 7 it first appeared in print in eh joe and other writings ( faber and faber , 1967 ) .