a film score is original music written specifically to accompany a film . the score comprises a number of orchestral , instrumental , or choral pieces called cues , which are timed to begin and end at specific points during the film in order to enhance the dramatic narrative and the emotional impact of the scene in question . savage , mark . '' where are the new movie themes ? '' bbc , july 28 , 2008 . scores are written by one or more composers , under the guidance of , or in collaboration with , the film 's director or producer and are then usually performed by an ensemble of musicians & nbsp ; – most often comprising an orchestra ( most likely a symphony orchestra ) or band , instrumental soloists , and choir or vocalists & nbsp ; – known as playback singers and recorded by a sound engineer . film scores encompass an enormous variety of styles of music , depending on the nature of the films they accompany . the majority of scores are orchestral works rooted in western classical music , but many scores are also influenced by jazz , rock , pop , blues , new-age and ambient music , and a wide range of ethnic and world music styles . since the 1950s , a growing number of scores have also included electronica as part of the score , and many scores written today feature a hybrid of orchestral and electronic instruments . since the invention of digital data and audio sampling , many modern films have been able to rely on digital samples to imitate the sound of live instruments , and many scores are created and performed wholly by the composers themselves , by using scorewriter , synthesizers , samplers , and midi controllers . songs such as pop songs and rock songs are usually not considered part of the film 's score , although songs do also form part of the film 's soundtrack . although some songs , especially in musicals , are based on thematic ideas from the score ( or vice versa ) , scores usually do not have lyrics , except for when sung by choirs or soloists as part of a cue . similarly , pop songs which are '' needle dropped '' into a specific scene in film for added emphasis , or which are depicted as being part of the scenes ' background ( e.g . , a song playing on a character 's car radio ) , are not considered part of the score , although occasionally the score 's composer will write an original pop song based on their themes , such as james horner 's '' my heart will go on '' from titanic , written for celine dion .