sefer yetzirah sēpher yəṣîrâh , book of formation , or book of creation ) is the title of the earliest extant book on jewish mysticism , although some early commentators treated it as a treatise on mathematical and linguistic theory as opposed to kabbalah . yetzirah is more literally translated as '' formation '' ; the word briah is used for '' creation '' . in hebrew , yetzirah can mean either '' creation '' or '' formation , '' but can also refer to the created or formed object itself . a work of art , for example , is called in hebrew 'yetzira ' , as well as the action of creating it . thus , the name sefer yetzirah could refer to the act of creating or forming the cosmos , or to the cosmos itself , or both . since there is a specific hebrew word for the creation of the cosmos ( briah ) it is more likely that the meaning refers to formation , or formed-object , or both . the book is traditionally ascribed to the patriarch abraham , although others attribute its writing to rabbi akiva . modern scholars have not reached consensus on the question of its origins . according to rabbi saadia gaon , the objective of the book 's author was to convey in writing how the things of our universe came into existence . sefer yetzirah hashalem ( with rabbi saadia gaon 's commentary ) , yosef qafih ( editor ) , jerusalem 1972 , p . 46 ( hebrew / judeo-arabic ) the famous opening words of the book are as follows : by thirty-two mysterious paths of wisdom jah has engraved all things , who is the lord of hosts , the god of israel , the living god , the almighty god , he that is uplifted and exalted , he that dwells forever , and whose name is holy ; having created his world by three derivatives of the hebrew root-word s e f a r : namely , sefer ( a book ) , sefor ( a count ) and sippur ( a story ) , along with ten calibrations of empty space , twenty-two letters of the hebrew alphabet , of which three are principal letters ( i.e . , seven are double-sounding consonants ( i.e . and twelve are ordinary letters ( i.e .