buddha is a demo album by the american rock band blink-182 . recorded and released in january 1994 under the name blink , it was the band 's first recording to be sold and distributed . blink-182 was formed in poway , california , a suburb outside of san diego , in august 1992 . guitarist tom delonge and mark hoppus were introduced to one another by hoppus ' sister . the duo recruited drummer scott raynor and began to practice together in his bedroom , spending hours together writing music , attending punk shows and movies and playing practical jokes . the band had recorded two previous demos in raynor 's bedroom — flyswatter and demo no.2 — using a four track recorder . most of the tracks from buddha were re-recorded for the band 's subsequent releases ; seven were re-recorded for their debut album cheshire cat and one was re-recorded for their second album dude ranch . the demo was originally released on the label filter records . in the early days of the band , hoppus worked at the record store the wherehouse , and became friends with his supervisor , pat secor . hoping to start his own record label , secor pulled money from his savings and helped finance and produce buddha . the demo was recorded live at local santee studio doubletime , comprising nearly all of the songs the trio had written up to that point . hoppus and friends cam jones and kerry key photographed the cassette inserts , and the original packaging was compiled by the band and hoppus ' family . upon completion , the demo was locally distributed to several san diego record stores , and was available for purchase at early concerts . buddha helped the trio cement an audience and was a deciding factor in their signing to local label cargo in 1993 . the recording became the subject of a legal dispute between the band and secor several years later . the group accused secor of selling the tape without paying royalties , and attempted to put a stop to his distribution with help of lawyer joe escalante of the vandals , who also owned independent record label kung fu records . kung fu remixed and remastered the demo , giving it a wider commercial reissue in october 1998 . this edition deletes two original tracks for other recordings from the original session . kung fu has since reportedly sold 300,000 copies of buddha . it is currently their only commercially available demo . in announcing the band 's 2019 album nine , hoppus stated that he counted their studio albums beginning with buddha .