in the christian tradition , a nativity scene ( also known as a manger scene , crib , crèche or , or in italian presepio or presepe , or bethlehem ) is the special exhibition , particularly during the christmastide , of art objects representing the birth of jesus . berliner , r . the origins of the creche . gazette des beaux-arts , 30 ( 1946 ) , p . 251 . while the term '' nativity scene '' may be used of any representation of the very common subject of the nativity of jesus in art , it has a more specialized sense referring to seasonal displays , either using model figures in a setting or reenactments called '' living nativity scenes '' ( tableau vivant ) in which real humans and animals participate . nativity scenes exhibit figures representing the infant jesus , his mother , mary , and her husband , joseph . other characters from the nativity story , such as shepherds , sheep , and angels may be displayed near the manger in a barn ( or cave ) intended to accommodate farm animals , as described in the gospel of luke . a donkey and an ox are typically depicted in the scene , and the magi and their camels , described in the gospel of matthew , are also included . many also include a representation of the star of bethlehem . several cultures add other characters and objects that may or may not be biblical . saint francis of assisi is credited with creating the first live nativity scene in 1223 in order to cultivate the worship of christ . he himself had recently been inspired by his visit to the holy land , where he 'd been shown jesus 's traditional birthplace . the scene 's popularity inspired communities throughout christian countries to stage similar exhibitions . distinctive nativity scenes and traditions have been created around the world , and are displayed during the christmas season in churches , homes , shopping malls , and other venues , and occasionally on public lands and in public buildings . nativity scenes have not escaped controversy , and in the united states of america their inclusion on public lands or in public buildings has provoked court challenges .