foundations of mathematics is the study of the philosophy and logical joachim lambek ( 2007 ) , '' foundations of mathematics '' , encyc . britannica and/or algorithmic basis of mathematics , or , in a broader sense , the mathematical investigation of what underlies the philosophical theories concerning the nature of mathematics . leon horsten ( 2007 , rev . 2012 ) , '' philosophy of mathematics '' sep in this latter sense , the distinction between foundations of mathematics and philosophy of mathematics turns out to be quite vague . foundations of mathematics can be conceived as the study of the basic mathematical concepts ( set , function , geometrical figure , number , etc . ) and how they form hierarchies of more complex structures and concepts , especially the fundamentally important structures that form the language of mathematics ( formulas , theories and their models giving a meaning to formulas , definitions , proofs , algorithms , etc . ) also called metamathematics , with an eye to the philosophical aspects and the unity of mathematics . the search for foundations of mathematics is a central question of the philosophy of mathematics ; the abstract nature of mathematical objects presents special philosophical challenges . the foundations of mathematics as a whole does not aim to contain the foundations of every mathematical topic . generally , the foundations of a field of study refers to a more-or-less systematic analysis of its most basic or fundamental concepts , its conceptual unity and its natural ordering or hierarchy of concepts , which may help to connect it with the rest of human knowledge . the development , emergence , and clarification of the foundations can come late in the history of a field , and might not be viewed by everyone as its most interesting part . mathematics always played a special role in scientific thought , serving since ancient times as a model of truth and rigor for rational inquiry , and giving tools or even a foundation for other sciences ( especially physics ) . mathematics ' many developments towards higher abstractions in the 19th century brought new challenges and paradoxes , urging for a deeper and more systematic examination of the nature and criteria of mathematical truth , as well as a unification of the diverse branches of mathematics into a coherent whole . the systematic search for the foundations of mathematics started at the end of the 19th century and formed a new mathematical discipline called mathematical logic , which later had strong links to theoretical computer science . it went through a series of crises with paradoxical results , until the discoveries stabilized during the 20th century as a large and coherent body of mathematical knowledge with several aspects or components ( set theory , model theory , proof theory , etc . ) , whose detailed properties and possible variants are still an active research field . its high level of technical sophistication inspired many philosophers to conjecture that it can serve as a model or pattern for the foundations of other sciences .