the biefeld–brown effect is an electrical phenomenon that produces an ionic wind that transfers its momentum to surrounding neutral particles . it describes a force observed on an asymmetric capacitor when high voltage is applied to the capacitor 's electrodes . once suitably charged up to high dc potentials , a thrust at the negative terminal , pushing it away from the positive terminal , is generated . the effect was named by inventor thomas townsend brown who claimed that he did a series of experiments with professor of astronomy paul alfred biefeld , a former teacher of brown whom brown claimed was his mentor and co-experimenter at denison university in ohio . the present day denison university claims they have no record of such experiments being carried out , or of any association between brown and biefeld . paul schatzkin , defying gravity : the parallel universe of t . townsend brown , 2005-2006-2007-2008 - tanglewood books , chapter 13 : notes from the rabbit hole 3 : '' he made things up '' ( online excerpts ) the use of an asymmetric capacitor , with the negative electrode being larger than the positive electrode , allowed for more thrust to be produced in the direction from the low-flux to the high-flux region compared to a conventional capacitor . these asymmetric capacitors became known as asymmetrical capacitor thrusters ( act ) . the biefeld–brown effect can be observed in ionocrafts and lifters , which utilize the effect to produce thrust in the air without requiring any combustion or moving parts . in his 1960 patent titled '' electrokinetic apparatus , '' brown refers to electrokinesis to describe the biefeld–brown effect , linking the phenomenon to the field of electrohydrodynamics ( ehd ) . brown also believed the biefeld–brown effect could produce an anti-gravity force , referred to as '' electrogravitics '' based on it being an electricity/gravity phenomenon . paul schatzkin , defying gravity : the parallel universe of t . townsend brown , 2005-2006-2007-2008 - tanglewood books , chapter 64 : flying saucer pipe dreams ( online excerpts ) '' through the utilization of the biefeld–brown effect , the flying saucer can generate an electrogravitational field of its own which modifies the earth ’ s field . '' ( online excerpts ) however , there is little evidence that supports brown 's claim on the effect 's anti-gravity properties .