the 54th massachusetts infantry regiment was an infantry regiment that saw extensive service in the union army during the american civil war . the unit was the second african-american regiment , following the 1st kansas colored volunteer infantry regiment , organized in the northern states during the civil war . headley , 450 . authorized by the emancipation proclamation , the regiment consisted of african-american enlisted men commanded by white officers . bowen , 672 . the unit began recruiting in february 1863 and trained at camp meigs on the outskirts of boston , massachusetts . prominent abolitionists were active in recruitment efforts , including frederick douglass , whose two sons were among the first to enlist . washington , 136 massachusetts governor john albion andrew , who had long pressured the u.s . department of war to begin recruiting african-americans , placed a high priority on the formation of the 54th massachusetts . berlin , 195 . andrew appointed robert gould shaw , the son of boston abolitionists , to command the regiment as colonel . the free black community in boston was also instrumental in recruiting efforts , utilizing networks reaching beyond massachusetts and even into the southern states to attract soldiers and fill out the ranks . blatt , 232–233 . after its departure from massachusetts on may 28 , 1863 , the 54th massachusetts was shipped to beaufort , south carolina and became part of the x corps commanded by major general david hunter . dyer , 1266 . during its service with the x corps , the 54th massachusetts took part in operations against charleston , south carolina , including the battle of grimball 's landing on july 16 , 1863 , and the more famous second battle of fort wagner on july 18 , 1863 . during the latter engagement , the 54th massachusetts , with other union regiments , executed a frontal assault against fort wagner and suffered casualties of 20 killed , 125 wounded , and 102 missing ( primarily presumed dead ) —roughly 40 percent of the unit 's numbers at that time . bowen , 676 . headley , 451 . col . robert g . shaw was killed on the parapet of fort wagner . in 1864 , as part of the union army 's department of florida , the 54th massachusetts took part in the battle of olustee . the service of the 54th massachusetts , particularly their charge at fort wagner , soon became one of the most famous episodes of the war , interpreted through artwork , poetry and song . blatt , 1 . more recently , the 54th massachusetts gained prominence in popular culture through the award-winning film glory . blatt , 3 .