simulated annealing ( sa ) is a probabilistic algorithm for approximating the global optimum of a given function . specifically , it is a metaheuristic to approximate global optimization in a large search space for an optimization problem . it is often used when the search space is discrete ( e.g . , the traveling salesman problem ) . for problems where finding an approximate global optimum is more important than finding a precise local optimum in a fixed amount of time , simulated annealing may be preferable to exact algorithms such as gradient descent , branch and bound . the name of the algorithm comes from annealing ( metallurgy ) , a technique involving heating and controlled cooling of a material to increase the size of its crystals and reduce their defects . both are attributes of the material that depend on their thermodynamic free energy . heating and cooling the material affects both the temperature and the thermodynamic free energy or gibbs energy . simulated annealing can be used for very hard computational optimization problems where exact algorithms fail ; even though it usually achieves an approximate solution to the global minimum , it could be enough for many practical problems . the problems solved by sa are currently formulated by an objective function of many variables , subject to several constraints . in practice , the constraint can be penalized as part of the objective function . similar techniques have been independently introduced on several occasions , including pincus ( 1970 ) , khachaturyan et al ( 1979 , 1981 ) , kirkpatrick , gelatt and vecchi ( 1983 ) , and cerny ( 1985 ) . in 1983 , this approach was used by kirkpatrick , gelatt jr . , vecchi , for a solution of the traveling salesman problem . they also proposed its current name , simulated annealing . this notion of slow cooling implemented in the simulated annealing algorithm is interpreted as a slow decrease in the probability of accepting worse solutions as the solution space is explored . accepting worse solutions allows for a more extensive search for the global optimal solution . in general , simulated annealing algorithms work as follows . the temperature progressively decreases from an initial positive value to zero . at each time step , the algorithm randomly selects a solution close to the current one , measures its quality , and moves to it according to the temperature-dependent probabilities of selecting better or worse solutions , which during the search respectively remain at 1 ( or positive ) and decrease towards zero . the simulation can be performed either by a solution of kinetic equations for density functions or by using the stochastic sampling method . the method is an adaptation of the metropolis–hastings algorithm , a monte carlo method to generate sample states of a thermodynamic system , published by n . metropolis et al . in 1953 .