norovirus , sometimes referred to as the winter vomiting bug , is the most common cause of gastroenteritis . infection is characterized by non-bloody diarrhea , vomiting , and stomach pain . fever or headaches may also occur . symptoms usually develop 12 to 48 hours after being exposed , and recovery typically occurs within 1 to 3 days . complications are uncommon , but may include dehydration , especially in the young , the old , and those with other health problems . the virus is usually spread by the fecal–oral route . this may be through contaminated food or water or person-to-person contact . it may also spread via contaminated surfaces or through air from the vomit of an infected person . risk factors include unsanitary food preparation and sharing close quarters . diagnosis is generally based on symptoms . confirmatory testing is not usually available but may be performed by public health agencies during outbreaks . prevention involves proper hand washing and disinfection of contaminated surfaces . alcohol-based hand sanitizers are not effective against the norovirus , according to the nhs information page on the subject . there is no vaccine or specific treatment for norovirus . management involves supportive care such as drinking sufficient fluids or intravenous fluids . oral rehydration solutions are the preferred fluids to drink , although other drinks without caffeine or alcohol can help . norovirus results in about 685 million cases of disease and 200,000 deaths globally a year . it is common both in the developed and developing world . those under the age of five are most often affected , and in this group it results in about 50,000 deaths in the developing world . norovirus infections occur more commonly during winter months . it often occurs in outbreaks , especially among those living in close quarters . in the united states , it is the cause of about half of all foodborne disease outbreaks . the virus is named after the city of norwalk , ohio , where an outbreak occurred in 1968 .