that same year , he and his brother were sent to the . up to then , his reading had been largely confined to the bible , though he had also enjoyed fairy tales and adventure stories , such as the novels of james fenimore cooper and gustave aimard . at the collège he became a highly successful student , heading his class in all subjects except mathematics and the sciences ; his schoolmasters remarked upon his ability to absorb great quantities of material . he won eight first prizes in the french academic competitions in 1869 , including the prize for religious education , and the following year won seven first prizes . hoping for a brilliant academic career for her second son , mme rimbaud hired a private tutor for arthur when he reached the third grade . father ariste lhéritier succeeded in sparking in the young scholar a love of greek , latin and french classical literature , and was the first to encourage the boy to write original verse , in both french and latin . rimbaud 's ver erat , which he wrote at age 14 , at the latin library , with an english translation . rimbaud 's first poem to appear in print was '' '' ( '' the orphans ' new year 's gifts '' ) , which was published in the 2 january 1870 issue of ; he was just 15 . two weeks later , a new teacher of rhetoric , the 22-year-old georges izambard , started at the collège de charleville . izambard became rimbaud 's mentor , and soon a close friendship formed between teacher and student , with rimbaud seeing izambard as a kind of elder brother . at the age of 15 , rimbaud was showing maturity as a poet ; the first poem he showed izambard , '' '' , would later be included in anthologies , and is often regarded as one of rimbaud 's three or four best poems . on 4 may 1870 , rimbaud 's mother wrote to izambard to complain that he had given rimbaud victor hugo 's to read . the franco-prussian war , between napoleon iii 's second french empire and the kingdom of prussia , broke out on 19 july 1870 . five days later , izambard left charleville for the summer to stay with his three aunts – the misses gindre – in douai . in the meantime , preparations for war continued and the collège de charleville became a military hospital . by the end of august , with the countryside in turmoil , rimbaud was bored and restless . in search of adventure he ran away by train to paris without funds for his ticket . on arrival at the , he was arrested and locked up in mazas prison to await trial for fare evasion and vagrancy . on 5 september , rimbaud wrote a desperate letter to izambard , who arranged with the prison governor that rimbaud be released into his care . as hostilities were continuing , he stayed with the misses gindre in douai until he could be returned to charleville . izambard finally handed rimbaud over to mme rimbaud on 27 september 1870 ( his mother reportedly slapped him in the face and admonished izambard georges izambard , rimbaud tel que je l'ai connu , mercure de france , 1963 , chap . iv , p . 33-34 . ) , but he was at home for only ten days before running away again . from late october 1870 , rimbaud 's behaviour became openly provocative ; he drank alcohol , spoke rudely , composed scatological poems , stole books from local shops , and abandoned his characteristically neat appearance by allowing his hair to grow long . on 13 and 15 may 1871 , he wrote letters ( later called the by scholars ) , to izambard and to his friend paul demeny respectively , about his method for attaining poetical transcendence or visionary power through a '' long , immense and rational derangement of all the senses '' ( to demeny ) . '' the sufferings are enormous , but one must be strong , be born a poet , and i have recognized myself as a poet '' ( to izambard ) .