the niagara escarpment is a long escarpment , or cuesta , in the united states and canada that runs predominantly east–west from new york through ontario , michigan , wisconsin , and illinois . the escarpment is most famous as the cliff over which the niagara river plunges at niagara falls , for which it is named . the escarpment is a unesco world biosphere reserve . it has the oldest forest ecosystem and trees in eastern north america . the escarpment is composed of an outcrop belt of the lockport formation of silurian age , and is similar to the onondaga formation , which runs in a parallel outcrop belt just to the south , through western new york and southern ontario . the escarpment is the most prominent of several escarpments formed in the bedrock of the great lakes basin . from its easternmost point near watertown , new york , lake ontario waterkeeper . waterkeeper.ca ( 2010-12-03 ) . retrieved on 2013-07-26 . the escarpment shapes in part the individual basins and landforms of lake ontario , lake huron , and lake michigan . in rochester , new york , the genesee river flows through the city in three waterfalls over the escarpment . the escarpment thence runs westward to the niagara river , forming a deep gorge north of niagara falls , which itself cascades over the escarpment . in southern ontario , it spans the niagara peninsula , closely following the lake ontario shore through the cities of st . catharines , hamilton , and dundas , where it takes a sharp turn north in the town of milton toward georgian bay . it then follows the georgian bay shore northwestwards to form the spine of the bruce peninsula and manitoulin island , as well as several smaller islands in northern lake huron , where it turns westwards into the upper peninsula of northern michigan , south of sault ste . marie . it then extends southwards into wisconsin john luczaj , '' geology of the niagara escarpment in wisconsin '' following the door peninsula through the bayshore blufflands and then more inland from the western coast of lake michigan and milwaukee , ending northwest of chicago near the wisconsin–illinois border .