the indian independence movement was a series of historic events with the ultimate aim of ending the british raj . the movement spanned from 1857 to 1947 . the first nationalistic revolutionary movement for indian independence emerged from bengal . it later took root in the newly formed indian national congress with prominent moderate leaders seeking only their fundamental right to appear for indian civil service ( british india ) , as well as more rights ( economical in nature ) for the people of the soil . the early part of the 20th century saw a more radical approach towards political self-rule proposed by leaders such as the lal bal pal , aurobindo ghosh and v . o . chidambaram pillai . the last stages of the self-rule struggle from the 1920s was characterized by congress 's adoption of mahatma gandhi 's policy of non-violence and civil disobedience , and several other campaigns . nationalists like subhas chandra bose , bhagat singh , bagha jatin , surya sen preached armed revolution to achieve self-rule . poets and writers such as rabindranath tagore , subramania bharati , bankim chandra chattopadhyay and kazi nazrul islam used literature , poetry , and speech as a tool for political awareness . feminists like sarojini naidu , pritilata waddedar , begum rokeya promoted the emancipation of indian women and their participation in national politics . b . r . ambedkar championed the cause of the disadvantaged sections of indian society within the more significant self-rule movement . the period of the world war ii saw the peak of the campaigns by the quit india movement led by congress and the indian national army movement led by subhas chandra bose with the help of japan . the indian self-rule movement was a mass-based movement that encompassed various sections of society . it also underwent a process of constant ideological evolution . although the underlying ideology of the campaign was anti-colonial , it was supported by a vision of independent capitalist economic development coupled with a secular , democratic , republican , and civil-libertarian political structure . after the 1930s , the movement took on a strong socialist orientation . the work of these various movements ultimately led to the indian independence act 1947 , which ended the suzerainty in india , and the creation of pakistan . india remained a dominion of the crown until 26 january 1950 , when the constitution of india came into force , establishing the republic of india ; pakistan was a dominion until 1956 when it adopted its first republican constitution . in 1971 , east pakistan declared independence as the people 's republic of bangladesh .