the , also lewchewan or loochooan , lewchew and the lewchewans : being a narrative of a visit to lewchew or loo choo , in october , 1850 . london , 1853 . about the ryukyu islands . ( also available here : by george smith are an east asian ethnic group native to the ryukyu islands , which stretch between the islands of kyushu and taiwan . administratively , they live in either the okinawa prefecture or the kagoshima prefecture within japan . their languages make up the ryukyuan languages , considered to be one of the two branches of the japonic languages , the other being japanese and its dialects . hachijō is sometimes considered to constitute a third branch . ryukyuans are not a recognized minority group in japan , as japanese authorities consider them just a subgroup of the japanese people , akin to the yamato people . although officially unrecognized , ryukyuans constitute the largest ethnolinguistic minority group in japan , with 1.3 million living in okinawa prefecture alone . ryukyuans inhabit the amami islands of kagoshima prefecture as well , and have constibuted to a considerable ryukyuan diaspora . as many as 600,000 more ethnic ryukyuans and their descendants are dispersed elsewhere in japan and worldwide ; most commonly in brazil and , to a lesser extent , in other territories where there is also a sizable japanese diaspora . in the majority of countries , the ryukyuan and japanese diaspora are not differentiated , so there are no reliable statistics for the former . recent genetic and anthropology studies indicate that the ryukyuans are significantly related to the yamato people ( mainland japanese ) but have also a relatively closer relation to the ainu people , compared with the yamato people . this is possibly explained with partially shared ancestry of the population during the jōmon period ( pre 10,000 bce – 1,000 bce ) and with the population of the yayoi period ( 1,000 bce – 300 ce ) - these peoples migrated from other parts of east asia ( specifically china and the korean peninsula ) . ryukyuans have a distinct culture with some matriarchal elements , native religion , and cuisine which had a fairly late ( 12th century ) introduction of rice . the population lived on the islands in isolation for many centuries , and in the 14th century three separate sanzan period merged into the ryukyu kingdom ( 1429–1879 ) which continued the maritime trade and tribute relations started in 1372 with ming dynasty china . in 1609 the satsuma domain ( based in kyushu ) invaded the ryukyu kingdom . the kingdom maintained a fictive independence in vassal status , in a dual subordinate status to both china and japan , because tokugawa japan was haijin to trade ( directly ) with china . during the japanese meiji period the kingdom became the ryukyu domain ( 1872–1879 ) , after which it was politically annexed by the empire of japan . in 1879 , after the annexation , the territory was reorganized as okinawa prefecture , with the last king ( shō tai ) forcibly exiled to tokyo . china renounced its claims to the islands in 1895 . during this period the meiji government , which sought to assimilate the ryukyuan people as japanese ( yamato ) , suppressed ryukyuan ethnic identity , tradition , culture and language . after world war ii , the ryūkyū islands were occupied by the united states between 1945 and 1950 and then from 1950 to 1972 . during this time many violations of human rights occurred . since the end of world war ii ryukyuans have expressed strong resentment against the japanese government and against us military facilities stationed in okinawa . united nations special rapporteur on discrimination and racism doudou diène , in his 2006 report , a noted perceptible level of discrimination and xenophobia against the ryukyuans , with the most serious discrimination they endure linked to their dislike of american military installations in the archipelago . an investigation into fundamental rights was suggested .