the battle of vauchamps ( 14 february 1814 ) was the final major engagement of the six days campaign of the war of the sixth coalition . it resulted in a part of the grande armée under napoleon i defeating a superior prussian and russian force of the army of silesia under field-marshal gebhard leberecht von blücher . at the beginning of 1814 , the armies of the french empire , under the direct command of emperor napoleon i , were scrambling to defend eastern france against the invading coalition armies . despite fighting against vastly superior forces , napoleon managed to score a few significant victories and , between 10 and 13 february repeatedly beat blücher 's army of silesia . on 13 february , reeling from his successive defeats , blücher looked to disengage from napoleon and instead manoeuvre with a part of his forces to fall upon the isolated vi corps of marshal auguste de marmont , who was defending napoleon 's rear . the prussian commander attacked and pushed back marmont late on 13 february . nevertheless , the emperor had read into his enemy 's intentions and directed powerful forces to support marmont . on the morning of 14 february , blücher , commanding a prussian corps and elements of two russian corps , resumed his attack against marmont . the latter continued to fall back until he was reinforced . napoleon arrived on the battlefield with strong combined-arms forces , which allowed the french to launch a determined counterattack and drive back the leading elements of the army of silesia . blücher realized that he was facing the emperor in person and decided to pull back and avoid another battle against napoleon . in practice , blücher 's attempt to disengage proved extremely difficult to execute , as the coalition force was by now in an advanced position , had virtually no cavalry present to cover its retreat and was facing an enemy who was ready to commit its numerous cavalry . while the actual pitched battle was short , the french infantry , under marshal marmont , and most of all the cavalry , under general emmanuel de grouchy , launched a relentless pursuit that rode down the enemy . pigeard 2004 , p . 886-887 . retreating in slow-moving square formations in broad daylight and along some excellent cavalry terrain , the coalition forces suffered very heavy losses , with several squares broken by the french cavalry . at nightfall , combat ceased and blücher opted for an exhausting night march in order to take his remaining forces to safety .