polygamy ( called plural marriage by mormons in the 19th century or the principle by modern fundamentalist practitioners of polygamy ) was practiced by leaders of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) for more than half of the 19th century , and practiced publicly from 1852 to 1890 by between 20 and 30 percent of latter-day saint families . today , various denominations of fundamentalist mormonism continue to practice polygamy . the latter-day saints ' practice of polygamy has been controversial , both within western society and the lds church itself . the u.s . was both fascinated and horrified by the practice of polygamy , with the republican platform at one time referencing '' the twin relics of barbarism—polygamy and slavery . '' us history.org website the private practice of polygamy was instituted in the 1830s by founder joseph smith . the public practice of plural marriage by the church was announced and defended in 1852 by a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles , orson pratt , by the request of church president brigham young . for over 60 years , the lds church and the united states were at odds over the issue : the church defended the practice as a matter of religious freedom , while the federal government aggressively sought to eradicate it , consistent with prevailing public opinion . polygamy was probably a significant factor in the utah war of 1857 and 1858 , given republican attempts to paint democratic president james buchanan as weak in his opposition to both polygamy and slavery . in 1862 , the united states congress passed the morrill anti-bigamy act , which prohibited plural marriage in the territories . in spite of the law , mormons continued to practice polygamy , believing that it was protected by the first amendment . in 1879 , in reynolds v . united states , reynolds v . united states “ the history of the supreme court ” the supreme court of the united states upheld the morrill act , stating : '' laws are made for the government of actions , and while they can not interfere with mere religious belief and opinion , they may with practices . '' in 1890 , when it became clear that utah would not be admitted to the union while polygamy was still practiced , church president wilford woodruff issued a manifesto that officially terminated the practice of polygamy . although this manifesto did not dissolve existing plural marriages , relations with the united states markedly improved after 1890 , such that utah was admitted as a u.s . state in 1896 . after the manifesto , some mormons continued to enter into polygamous marriages , but these eventually stopped in 1904 when church president joseph f . smith disavowed polygamy before congress and issued a '' second manifesto , '' calling for all plural marriages in the church to cease , and established excommunication as the consequence for those who disobeyed . several small '' fundamentalist '' groups , seeking to continue the practice , split from the lds church , including the apostolic united brethren ( aub ) and the fundamentalist church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( flds church ) . meanwhile , the lds church continues its policy of excommunicating members found practicing polygamy , and today actively seeks to distance itself from fundamentalist groups that continue the practice . the lds church encourages journalists not to use the word '' mormon '' in reference to organizations or people that practice polygamy ; the church repudiates polygamist groups and excommunicates their members if discovered ; on its web site , the church states that '' the standard doctrine of the church is monogamy '' and that polygamy was a temporary exception to the rule . citing jacob , chapter 2 , from the book of mormon : '' wherefore , my brethren , hear me , and hearken to the word of the lord : for there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife ; and concubines he shall have none . for if i will , saith the lord of hosts , raise up seed unto me , i will command my people ; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things . ''