image : meister der palastkapelle in palermo 003.jpg thumb icon of ss . basil the great ( left ) and john chrysostom , ascribed authors of the two most frequently used eastern orthodox divine liturgies , c . 1150 ( mosaic in the palatine chapel , palermo ) . divine liturgy ; ; ; ; , , or holy liturgy ; is the eucharistic service of the byzantine rite , developed from the antiochene rite of christian liturgy which is that of the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople . as such , it is used in the eastern orthodox , the greek catholic churches , and the ukrainian lutheran church . although the same term is sometimes applied in english to the eucharistic service of armenian christians , both of the armenian apostolic church western diocese home william s . pregnall , laity and worship ( seabury press 1975 ) , p . 117 } the greek catholic and orthodox churches see the divine liturgy as transcending time and the world . all believers are seen as united in worship in the kingdom of god along with the departed saints and the angels of heaven . everything in the liturgy is seen as symbolic , but not merely so , for it makes present the unseen reality . according to eastern tradition and belief , the liturgy 's roots go back to the adaptation of jewish liturgy by early christians . the first part , termed the '' liturgy of the catechumens '' , includes like a synagogue service the reading of scriptures and , in some places , perhaps a sermon/homily . the second half , added later , is based on the last supper and the first eucharistic celebrations by early christians . eastern christians believe that the eucharist is the central part of the service in which they participate , as they believe the bread and wine truly become the real body and blood of christ , and that by partaking of it they jointly become the body of christ ( that is , the church ) . each liturgy has its differences from others , but most are very similar to each other with adaptations based on tradition , purpose , culture and theology .