leaves of grass is a poetry collection by american poet walt whitman ( 1819–1892 ) , each poem of which is loosely connected and represents the celebration of his philosophy of life and humanity . though it was first published in 1855 , whitman spent most of his professional life writing and rewriting leaves of grass , miller , 57 revising it multiple times until his death . this resulted in vastly different editions over four decades—the first edition being a small book of twelve poems , and the last , a compilation of over 400 . influenced by ralph waldo emerson and the transcendentalism movement , itself an offshoot of romanticism , whitman 's poetry praises nature and the individual human 's role in it . rather than relying on symbolism , allegory , and meditation on the religion and spiritual , like much of the poetry ( especially english poetry ) to come before it , leaves of grass ( particularly the first edition ) exalts the body and the material world instead . much like emerson , however , whitman does not diminish the role of the mind or the spirit ; rather , he elevates the human form and the human mind , deeming both worthy of poetic praise . with one exception , its poems do not rhyme or follow standard rules for meter and line length . among the works in this collection are '' song of myself '' , '' i sing the body electric '' , and '' out of the cradle endlessly rocking '' . later editions would include whitman 's elegy to the assassinated president abraham lincoln , '' when lilacs last in the dooryard bloom 'd '' . leaves of grass is notable for its discussion of delight in sensual pleasures during a time when such candid displays were considered immoral . accordingly , the book was highly controversial during its time for its explicit sexual imagery , and whitman was subject to derision by many contemporary critics . over time , however , the collection has infiltrated popular culture and been recognized as one of the central works of american poetry . there have been held to be either six or nine editions of leaves of grass , the count depending on how they are distinguished : scholars who hold that an edition is an entirely new set of type will count the 1855 , 1856 , 1860 , 1867 , 1871–72 , and 1881 printings ; whereas others will include the 1876 , 1888–1889 , and 1891–1892 ( the '' deathbed edition '' ) releases .