the esophagus , ( american english ) or oesophagus ( british english ; see spelling differences ) , informally known as the food pipe or gullet , is an organ in vertebrates through which food passes , aided by peristalsis , from the pharynx to the stomach . the esophagus is a fibromuscular tube , about long in adults , which travels behind the trachea and heart , passes through the diaphragm and empties into the uppermost region of the stomach . during swallowing , the epiglottis tilts backwards to prevent food from going down the larynx and lungs . the word oesophagus is from ancient greek οἰσοφάγος ( oisophágos ) , from οἴσω ( oísō ) , future form of φέρω ( phérō , “ i carry ” ) + ἔφαγον ( éphagon , “ i ate ” ) . the wall of the esophagus from the lumen outwards consists of mucosa , submucosa ( connective tissue ) , muscular layer between layers of fibrous tissue , and an outer layer of connective tissue . the mucosa is a stratified squamous epithelium of around three layers of squamous cells , which contrasts to the simple columnar epithelia of the stomach . the transition between these two types of epithelium is visible as a zig-zag line . most of the muscle is smooth muscle although striated muscle predominates in its upper third . it has two muscular rings or sphincters in its wall , one at the top and one at the bottom . the lower sphincter helps to prevent reflux of acidic stomach content . the esophagus has a rich blood supply and venous drainage . its smooth muscle is innervated by involuntary nerves ( sympathetic nerves via the sympathetic trunk and parasympathetic nerves via the vagus nerve ) and in addition voluntary nerves ( lower motor neurons ) which are carried in the vagus nerve to innervate its striated muscle . the esophagus passes through the thoracic cavity into the diaphragm into the stomach . the esophagus may be affected by gerd , cancer , prominent dilated blood vessels called varices that can bleed heavily , tears , constrictions , and disorders of motility . diseases may cause difficulty swallowing ( dysphagia ) , painful swallowing ( odynophagia ) , chest pain , or cause no symptoms at all . clinical investigations include x-rays when swallowing barium sulfate , endoscopy , and ct scans . surgically , the esophagus is difficult to access .