sitting bull ; reference-idnld december 15 , 1890 ) was a hunkpapa lakota leader who led his people during years of resistance against united states government policies . he was killed by indian agency police on the standing rock indian reservation during an attempt to arrest him , at a time when authorities feared that he would join the ghost dance movement . before the battle of the little bighorn , sitting bull had a vision in which he saw many soldiers , '' as thick as grasshoppers , '' falling upside down into the lakota camp , which his people took as a foreshadowing of a major victory in which many soldiers would be killed . about three weeks later , the confederated lakota tribes with the northern cheyenne defeated the 7th cavalry under lt . col . george armstrong custer on june 25 , 1876 , annihilating custer 's battalion and seeming to bear out sitting bull 's prophetic vision . sitting bull 's leadership inspired his people to a major victory . in response , the u.s . government sent thousands more soldiers to the area , forcing many of the lakota to surrender over the next year . sitting bull refused to surrender , and in may 1877 , he led his band north to wood mountain , north-western territory ( now saskatchewan ) . he remained there until 1881 , at which time he and most of his band returned to u.s . territory and surrendered to u.s . forces . after working as a performer with buffalo bill 's wild west show , sitting bull returned to the standing rock agency in south dakota . due to fears that he would use his influence to support the ghost dance movement , indian service agent james mclaughlin at fort yates ordered his arrest . during an ensuing struggle between sitting bull 's followers and the agency police , sitting bull was shot in the side and head by standing rock policemen lieutenant bull head ( tatankapah , and red tomahawk ( marcelus chankpidutah , , after the police were fired upon by sitting bull 's supporters . his body was taken to nearby fort yates for burial . in 1953 , his lakota family exhumed what were believed to be his remains , reburying them near mobridge , south dakota , near his birthplace .