image : coat of arms of frederick v of the palatinate.svg thumb right 200px frederick 's coat of arms frederick v ; 26 august 1596 – 29 november 1632 ) was the elector palatine of the rhine in the holy roman empire from 1610 to 1623 , and reigned as king of bohemia from 1619 to 1620 . he was forced to abdicate both roles , and the brevity of his reign in bohemia earned him the derisive sobriquet '' the winter king '' ( czech : zimní král ; german : winterkönig ) . frederick was born at the ( a hunting lodge ) near amberg in the upper palatinate . he was the son of frederick iv and of louise juliana of orange-nassau , the daughter of william the silent and charlotte of bourbon . an intellectual , a mystic , and a calvinism , he succeeded his father as prince-elector of the rhenish palatinate in 1610 . he was responsible for the construction of the famous hortus palatinus gardens in heidelberg . in 1618 the largely protestant estates of bohemia rebelled against their catholic king ferdinand , triggering the outbreak of the thirty years ' war . frederick was asked to assume the crown of bohemia . he accepted the offer and was crowned on 4 november 1619 , as frederick i ; the adjective means '' of oberpfalz '' or '' of the upper palatinate '' ) . the estates chose frederick because he was the leader of the protestant union , a military alliance founded by his father , and hoped for the support of frederick 's father-in-law , james vi of scotland and i of england . however , james opposed the takeover of bohemia from the habsburgs and frederick 's allies in the protestant union failed to support him militarily by signing the treaty of ulm ( 1620 ) . his brief reign as king of bohemia ended with his defeat at the battle of white mountain on 8 november 1620 – a year and four days after his coronation . after the battle , the palatinate campaign frederick 's palatine lands and he had to flee to his uncle prince maurice , stadtholder of the dutch republic in 1622 . an imperial edict formally deprived him of the palatinate in 1623 . he lived the rest of his life in exile with his wife and family , mostly at the hague , and died in mainz in 1632 . his eldest surviving son charles i louis , elector palatine , returned to power in 1648 with the end of the war . another son was prince rupert of the rhine , one of the most colourful figures of his time . his daughter princess sophia was eventually named heiress presumptive to the british throne , and is the founder of the hanoverian line of kings .