sir louis-hippolyte ménard dit la fontaine , 1st baronet , kcmg ( october 4 , 1807 – february 26 , 1864 ) was a canadian politician who served as the first premier of the united province of canada and the first head of a responsible government in canada . he was born in boucherville , lower canada in 1807 . a jurist and statesman , la fontaine was first elected to the legislative assembly of lower canada in 1830 . he was a supporter of papineau and member of the parti canadien ( later the parti canadien ) . after the severe consequences of the rebellions of 1837 against the british authorities , he advocated political reforms within the new union regime of 1841 . under this union of the two canadas he worked with robert baldwin in the formation of a party of upper and lower canadian liberal reformers . he and baldwin formed a government in 1842 but resigned in 1843 . in 1848 he was asked by the governor-general , lord elgin , to form the first administration under the new policy of responsible government . the la fontaine-baldwin government , formed on march 11 , battled for the restoration of the official status of the french language , which was abolished with the union act , and the principles of responsible government and the double-majority in the voting of bills . while baldwin was reforming canada west ( upper canada ) , la fontaine passed bills to abolish the tenure seigneuriale ( seigneurial system ) and grant amnesty to the leaders of the rebellions in lower canada who had been exiled . the bill passed , but it was not accepted by the loyalists of canada east who protested violently and burned down the parliament in montreal . la fontaine retired to private life in 1851 but was appointed chief justice of quebec in 1853 . in 1854 he was created a baronet by queen victoria and a knight commander in the pontifical order of st . sylvester by pope pius ix in 1855 . his last name is often mistakingly written in one word ( lafontaine or lafontaine ) , the correct spelling being '' la fontaine '' , as in '' jean de la fontaine '' , the writer .