fecal incontinence ( fi ) , or in some forms encopresis , is a lack of control over defecation , leading to involuntary loss of bowel contents , both liquid stool elements and mucus , or solid feces . when this loss includes flatus ( gas ) it is referred to as anal incontinence . fi is a sign or a symptom , not a diagnosis . incontinence can result from different causes and might occur with either constipation or diarrhea . continence is maintained by several interrelated factors , including the anal sampling mechanism , and usually there is more than one deficiency of these mechanisms for incontinence to develop . the most common causes are thought to be immediate or delayed puerperal disorder , complications from prior anorectal surgery ( especially involving the anal sphincters or hemorrhoidal vascular cushions ) , altered bowel habits ( e.g . , caused by irritable bowel syndrome , crohn 's disease , ulcerative colitis , food intolerance , or constipation with overflow incontinence ) , and receptive anal sex . an estimated 2.2 % of community dwelling adults are affected . fecal incontinence has three main consequences : local reactions of the perianal skin and urinary tract , including maceration ( softening and whitening of skin due to continuous moisture ) , urinary tract infections , or decubitus ulcers ( pressure sores ) ; a financial expense for individuals ( due to cost of medication and incontinence products , and loss of productivity ) , employers ( days off ) , and health insurance and society generally ( health care costs , unemployment ) ; and an associated decrease in quality of life . there is often reduced self-esteem , shame , humiliation , depression , a need to organize life around easy access to a toilet and avoidance of enjoyable activities . fi is an example of a stigmatized medical condition , which creates barriers to successful management . people may be too embarrassed to seek medical help , and attempt to self-manage the symptom in secrecy from others . fi is one of the most psychologically and socially debilitating conditions in an otherwise healthy individual , but it is generally treatable . management may be achieved through an individualized mix of dietary , pharmacologic , and surgical measures . health care professionals are often poorly informed about treatment options , and may fail to recognize the effect of fi .