a dvd player is a device that plays dvds produced under both the dvd-video dvd-rom and dvd-audio technical standards , two different and incompatible standards . some dvd players will also play audio cds . dvd players are connected to a television to watch the dvd content , which could be a movie , a recorded tv show , or other content . the first dvd player was created by sony corporation in japan in collaboration with pacific digital company from the united states in 1997 . some manufacturers originally announced that dvd players would be available as early as the middle of 1996 . these predictions were too optimistic . delivery was initially held up for '' political '' reasons of copy protection demanded by movie studios , but was later delayed by lack of movie titles . the first players appeared in japan on november 1 , 1996 , followed by the united states on march 31 , 1997 , with distribution limited to only seven major cities for the first six months . players slowly trickled into other regions around the world . prices for the first players in 1997 started at 600 and could top out at prices over 1000 . by the end of 2000 , players were available for under 100 at discount retailers . in 2003 players became available for under 50 . six years after the initial launch , close to one thousand models of dvd players were available from over a hundred consumer electronics manufacturers . fujitsu released the first dvd-rom-equipped computer on november 6 in great britain . toshiba released a dvd-rom-equipped computer and a dvd-rom drive in japan in early 1997 ( moved back from december which was moved back from november ) . dvd-rom drives from toshiba , pioneer , panasonic , hitachi , and sony began appearing in sample quantities as early as january 1997 , but none were available before may . the first pc upgrade kits ( a combination of dvd-rom drive and hardware decoder card ) became available from creative labs , hi-val , and diamond multimedia in april and may 1997 . in 2014 , every major pc manufacturer has models that include dvd-rom drives . the first dvd-audio players were released in japan by pioneer in late 1999 , but they did not play copy-protected discs . matsushita ( under the panasonic and technics labels ) first released full-fledged players in july 2000 for 700 to 1,200 . dvd-audio players are now also made by aiwa , denon , jvc , kenwood , madrigal , marantz , nakamichi , onkyo , toshiba , yamaha , and others . sony released the first sacd players in may 1999 for 5,000 . pioneer 's first dvd-audio players released in late 1999 also played sacd . sacd players are now also made by accuphase , aiwa , denon , kenwood , marantz , philips , sharp , and others .