the symphony no . 8 in e-flat major by gustav mahler is one of the largest-scale choral works in the classical concert repertoire . because it requires huge instrumental and vocal forces it is frequently called the '' symphony of a thousand '' , although the work is normally presented with far fewer than a thousand performers and the composer did not sanction that name . the work was composed in a single inspired burst at his maiernigg villa in southern austria in the summer of 1906 . the last of mahler 's works that was premiered in his lifetime , the symphony was a critical and popular success when he conducted the munich philharmonic in its first performance , in munich , on 12 september 1910 . the fusion of song and symphony had been a characteristic of mahler 's early works . in his '' middle '' compositional period after 1901 , a change of style led him to produce three purely instrumental symphonies . the eighth , marking the end of the middle period , returns to a combination of orchestra and voice in a symphonic context . the structure of the work is unconventional ; instead of the normal framework of several movements , the piece is in two parts . part & nbsp ; i is based on the latin text of a ninth-century christian hymn for pentecost , veni creator spiritus ( '' come , creator spirit '' ) , and part & nbsp ; ii is a setting of the words from the closing scene of goethe 's faust . the two parts are unified by a common idea , that of redemption through the power of love , a unity conveyed through shared musical themes . mahler had been convinced from the start of the work 's significance ; in renouncing the pessimism that had marked much of his music , he offered the eighth as an expression of confidence in the eternal human spirit . in the period following the composer 's death , performances were comparatively rare . however , from the mid-20th century onwards the symphony has been heard regularly in concert halls all over the world , and has been recorded many times . while recognising its wide popularity , modern critics have divided opinions on the work ; theodor w . adorno , robert simpson and jonathan carr found its optimism unconvincing , and considered it artistically and musically inferior to mahler 's other symphonies . conversely , it has also been compared—by deryck cooke—to ludwig van beethoven 's symphony no . & nbsp ; 9 as a defining human statement for its century .