the four seasons is a group of four violin concerto by italian composer antonio vivaldi , each of which gives musical expression to a season of the year . they were written around 1716–1717 and published in 1725 in amsterdam , together with eight additional concerti , as ( the contest between harmony and invention ) . the four seasons is the best known of vivaldi 's works . though three of the concerti are wholly original , the first , '' spring '' , borrows patterns from a sinfonia in the first act of vivaldi 's contemporaneous opera il giustino . the inspiration for the concertos is not the countryside around mantua , as initially supposed , where vivaldi was living at the time , since according to karl heller they could have been written as early as 1716–1717 , while vivaldi was engaged with the court of mantua only in 1718 . they were a revolution in musical conception : in them vivaldi represented flowing creeks , singing birds ( of different species , each specifically characterized ) , a shepherd and his barking dog , buzzing flies , storms , drunken dancers , hunting parties from both the hunters ' and the prey 's point of view , frozen landscapes , and warm winter fires . unusual for the period , vivaldi published the concerti with accompanying sonnets ( possibly written by the composer himself ) that elucidated what it was in the spirit of each season that his music was intended to evoke . the concerti therefore stand as one of the earliest and most detailed examples of what would come to be called program music—in other words , music with a narrative element . vivaldi took great pains to relate his music to the texts of the poems , translating the poetic lines themselves directly into the music on the page . for example , in the middle section of '' spring '' , when the goatherd sleeps , his barking dog can be heard in the viola section . the music is elsewhere similarly evocative of other natural sounds . vivaldi divided each concerto into three movements ( fast–slow–fast ) , and , likewise , each linked sonnet into three sections .