medical cannabis , or medical marijuana ( mmj ) , is cannabis and cannabinoids that are prescribed by physicians for their patients . the use of cannabis as medicine has not been rigorously tested due to production and governmental restrictions , resulting in limited clinical research to define the safety and efficacy of using cannabis to treat diseases . preliminary evidence suggests that cannabis can reduce nausea and vomiting during chemotherapy , improve appetite in people with hiv/aids , and reduce chronic pain and muscle spasms . short-term use increases the risk of minor and major adverse effects . common side effects include dizziness , feeling tired , vomiting , and hallucinations . long-term effects of cannabis are not clear . concerns include memory and cognition problems , risk of addiction , schizophrenia in young people , and the risk of children taking it by accident . the cannabis plant has a history of medicinal use dating back thousands of years in many cultures . some american medical organizations have requested removal of cannabis from the list of schedule i controlled substances maintained by the united states federal government , followed by regulatory and scientific review . others oppose its legalization , such as the american academy of pediatrics . medical cannabis can be administered through various methods , including capsules , lozenges , tinctures , dermal patches , oral or dermal sprays , cannabis edibles , and vaporizing or cannabis smoking . synthetic cannabinoids are available for prescription use in some countries , such as dronabinol and nabilone . countries that allow the medical use of whole-plant cannabis include australia , canada , chile , colombia , germany , greece , israel , italy , the netherlands , peru , poland , portugal , and uruguay . in the united states , 33 states and the district of columbia have legalized cannabis for medical purposes , beginning with the passage of california 's proposition 215 in 1996 . although cannabis remains prohibited for any use at the federal level , the rohrabacher–farr amendment was enacted in december 2014 , limiting the ability of federal law to be enforced in states where medical cannabis has been legalized .