reverberation , in psychoacoustics and acoustics , is a persistence of sound after the sound is produced . a reverberation , or reverb , is created when a sound or signal is reflected causing numerous reflections to build up and then decay as the sound is absorbed by the surfaces of objects in the space – which could include furniture , people , and air . this is most noticeable when the sound source stops but the reflections continue , their amplitude decreasing , until zero is reached . reverberation is frequency dependent : the length of the decay , or reverberation time , receives special consideration in the architectural design of spaces which need to have specific reverberation times to achieve optimum performance for their intended activity . in comparison to a distinct echo , that is detectable at a minimum of 50 to 100 & nbsp ; ms after the previous sound , reverberation is the occurrence of reflections that arrive in a sequence of less than approximately 50 ms . as time passes , the amplitude of the reflections gradually reduces to non-noticeable levels . reverberation is not limited to indoor spaces as it exists in forests and other outdoor environments where reflection exists . reverberation occurs naturally when a person sings , talks , or plays an instrument acoustically in a hall or performance space with sound-reflective surfaces . the sound of reverberation is often electronically added to the vocals of singers and to musical instruments . this is done in both live sound systems and sound recordings by using effects units . effects units that are specialized in the generation of the reverberation effect are commonly called reverbs . whereas reverberation normally adds to the naturalness of recorded sound by adding a sense of space , reverberation can reduce speech intelligibility , especially when noise is also present . users of hearing aids frequently report difficulty in understanding speech in reverberant , noisy situations . reverberation is a very significant source of mistakes in automatic speech recognition . dereverberation is the process of reducing the level of reverberation in a sound or signal .