air canada flight & nbsp ; 143 was a canadian scheduled domestic airline between montreal and edmonton that ran out of fuel on july & nbsp ; 23 , 1983 , at an altitude of , midway through the flight . the flight crew successfully glided the boeing 767 to an emergency landing at a former rcaf station gimli in gimli , manitoba that had been converted to a motor racing track . this unusual aviation incident earned the aircraft the nickname '' gimli glider '' . the accident is commonly blamed on mistaking pounds for kilograms , which resulted in the aircraft carrying only 45 % of its required fuel load . however , the units error was the last in a series of failures that aligned in a swiss cheese model to cause the accident . the boeing 767 had a fuel quantity indication system with two redundant channels , but a design flaw caused it to fail if only one channel failed . this caused a much higher failure rate than expected . the fqis on the aircraft had failed , and air canada 's only spare fqis had also failed . a technician applied a temporary workaround to the aircraft 's fqis and logged the repair , but another technician misunderstood the logbook entry and undid the repair . the boeing 767 may not be flown with inoperative fuel gauges , but a miscommunication led the flight crew to fly using only a dripstick measurement of the fuel tanks . the crew needed to enter the fuel quantity into the flight computer in kilograms , but they mistakenly did the calculation with the density of jet fuel in pounds/litre . the aircraft ran out of fuel halfway to edmonton , where air canada maintenance staff were waiting to install a working fqis that they had borrowed from another airline . the board of inquiry found fault with air canada procedures , training , and manuals . it recommended the adoption of fueling procedures and other safety measures that were already being used by us and european airlines . the board also recommended the immediate conversion of all air canada aircraft from imperial units to metric units , since a mixed fleet was more dangerous than an all-imperial or an all-metric fleet .