in economics , profit maximization is the short run or long run process by which a firm may determine the price , input and output levels that lead to the highest profit . neoclassical economics , currently the mainstream approach to microeconomics , usually models the firm as maximizing profit . there are several perspectives one can take on this problem . first , since profit equals revenue minus cost , one can plot graphically each of the variables revenue and cost as functions of the level of output and find the output level that maximizes the difference ( or this can be done with a table of values instead of a graph ) . second , if specific functional forms are known for revenue and cost in terms of output , one can use calculus to maximize profit with respect to the output level . third , since the first order condition for the optimization equates marginal revenue and marginal cost , if marginal revenue ( mr ) and marginal cost ( mc ) functions in terms of output are directly available one can equate these , using either equations or a graph . fourth , rather than a function giving the cost of producing each potential output level , the firm may have input cost functions giving the cost of acquiring any amount of each input , along with a production function showing how much output results from using any combination of input quantities . in this case one can use calculus to maximize profit with respect to input usage levels , subject to the input cost functions and the production function . the first order condition for each input equates the marginal revenue product of the input ( the increment to revenue from selling the product caused by an increment to the amount of the input used ) to the marginal cost of the input . for a firm in a perfect competition market for its output , the revenue function will simply equal the market price times the quantity produced and sold , whereas for a monopolist , which chooses its level of output simultaneously with its selling price , the revenue function takes into account the fact that higher levels of output require a lower price in order to be sold . an analogous feature holds for the input markets : in a perfectly competitive input market the firm 's cost of the input is simply the amount purchased for use in production times the market-determined unit input cost , whereas a monopsonist ’ s input price per unit is higher for higher amounts of the input purchased . the principal difference between short-run and long-run profit maximization is that in the long run the quantities of all inputs , including physical capital , are choice variables , while in the short run the amount of capital is predetermined by past investment decisions . in either case there are inputs of labor and raw materials .