the army of the republic of vietnam ( arvn ; ; were the ground forces of the south vietnamese military from its inception in 1955 to the fall of saigon in april 1975 . history of the army of the republic of vietnam it is estimated to have suffered 1,394,000 casualties ( killed and wounded ) during the vietnam war . casualties – us vs nva/vc the arvn began as a postcolonial army that was military assistance advisory group and had engaged in conflict since its inception . several changes occurred throughout its lifetime , initially from a 'blocking-force ' to a more modern conventional force using air assault . during the american intervention , the arvn was reduced to playing a defensive role with an incomplete modernisation , and transformed again following vietnamization , it was upgeared , expanded , and reconstructed to fulfill the role of the departing american forces . by 1974 , it had become much more effective with foremost counterinsurgency expert and nixon adviser robert thompson noting that regular forces were very well-trained and second only to the american and israeli forces in the free world and with general creighton abrams remarking that 70 % of units were on par with the us army . however , the withdrawal of american forces by vietnamization meant the armed forces could not effectively fulfill all of the aims of the program and had become completely dependent on u.s . equipment since it was meant to fulfill the departing role of the united states . at the arvn 's peak , an estimated 1 in 9 citizens of south vietnam were enlisted , and it had become the fourth-largest army in the world composed of regular forces and the more voluntary regional and village-level militias . unique in serving a dual military-civilian administrative purpose , in direct competition with the viet cong , the arvn had also become a component of political power and suffered from continual issues of political loyalty appointments , corruption in leadership , factional infighting , and occasional open internal conflict . after the fall of saigon to north vietnam 's people 's army of vietnam ( pavn ) , the arvn was dissolved . while some high-ranking officers had fled the country to the united states or elsewhere , thousands of former arvn officers were sent to re-education camps by the communist government of the unified socialist republic of vietnam . five arvn generals committed suicide to avoid capture by the pavn/vc .