in music , an ostinato ( derived from italian : stubborn , compare english , from latin : 'obstinate ' ) is a motif or phrase that persistently repeats in the same musical voice , frequently in the same pitch . well-known ostinato-based pieces include both classical compositions , such as ravel 's boléro and the carol of the bells , and popular songs such as donna summer and giorgio moroder 's '' i feel love '' ( 1977 ) , henry mancini 's theme from peter gunn ( 1959 ) , and the verve 's '' bitter sweet symphony '' ( 1997 ) . bufe , chaz ( 1994 ) portuguese ( 2016 ) . an understandable guide to music theory : the most useful aspects of theory for rock , jazz , and blues musicians , p . 59 . . both ostinatos and ostinati are accepted english plural forms , the latter reflecting the word 's italian etymology . the repeating idea may be a rhythmic pattern , part of a tune , or a complete melody in itself . roger kamien ( 1258 ) . music : an appreciation , p . 611 . strictly speaking , ostinati should have exact repetition , but in common usage , the term covers repetition with variation and development , such as the alteration of an ostinato line to fit changing harmony or keys . within the context of film music , claudia gorbman defines an ostinato as a repeated melodic or rhythmic figure that propels scenes that lack dynamic visual action . gorbman , claudia . '' film music '' . film studies : critical approaches . oxford : oxford university press . 2000 . p . 43 . ostinati play an important part in improvised music ( rock and jazz ) , in which they are often referred to as riffs or vamps . a '' favorite technique of contemporary jazz writers '' , ostinati are often used in modal and latin jazz and traditional african music including gnawa music . rawlins , robert ( 2005 ) . jazzology : the encyclopedia of jazz theory for all musicians , pp . 132–133 . the term ostinato essentially has the same meaning as the medieval latin word pes , the word ground as applied to classical music , and the word riff in contemporary popular music .