in digital imaging systems , color management ( or colour management ) is the controlled conversion between the color representations of various devices , such as image scanners , digital cameras , monitors , tv screens , film printers , computer printers , offset presses , and corresponding media . the primary goal of color management is to obtain a good match across color devices ; for example , the colors of one frame of a video should appear the same on a computer lcd , on a plasma tv screen , and as a printed poster . color management helps to achieve the same appearance on all of these devices , provided the devices are capable of delivering the needed color intensities . with photography , it is often critical that prints or online galleries appear how they were intended . color management can not guarantee identical color reproduction , as this is rarely possible , but it can at least give more control over any changes which may occur . parts of this technology are implemented in the operating system ( os ) , helper libraries , the application , and devices . a cross-platform view of color management is the use of an icc-compatible color management system . the international color consortium ( icc ) is an industry consortium that has defined : an open standard for a color matching module ( cmm ) at the os level icc profile for : devices , including devicelink-profiles that represent a complete color transformation from source device to target device working spaces , the color spaces in which color data is meant to be manipulated there are other approaches to color management besides using icc profiles . this is partly due to history and partly because of other needs than the icc standard covers . the film and broadcasting industries make use of some of the same concepts , but they frequently rely on more limited boutique solutions . the film industry , for instance , often uses 3d luts ( lookup table ) to represent a complete color transformation for a specific rgb encoding . at the consumer level , color management currently applies more to still images than video , in which color management is still in its infancy .