raynald of châtillon ; 11254 july 1187 ) , also known as reynald or reginald of châtillon , was prince of antioch from 1153 to 1160 or 1161 , and lord of oultrejordain from 1175 until his death . he was born the second son of a french noble family . after losing a part of his patrimony , he joined the second crusade in 1147 . he settled in the kingdom of jerusalem and served in the royal army as a mercenary . raynald married constance , the reigning princess of antioch , in 1153 , in spite of her subjects ' opposition . he was always in need of funds . he captured and tortured aimery of limoges , latin patriarch of antioch , because aimery had refused to pay a subsidy to him . raynald launched a plundering raid in cyprus in 1155 , causing great destruction . four years later , the byzantine emperor , manuel i komnenos , came to antioch at the head of a large army , forcing raynald to beg for his mercy . raynald made a raid in the valley of the river euphrates at marash to seize booty from the local peasants in 1160 or 1161 , but he was captured by the governor of aleppo . raynald was held in prison until 1176 . after his release for a large ransom , he did not return to antioch , because his wife had meanwhile died . he married stephanie of milly , the wealthy heiress of oultrejordain . since baldwin iv of jerusalem also granted hebron to him , raynald was one of the wealthiest barons of the realm . he controlled the caravan routes between egypt and syria . baldwin , who suffered from leprosy , made him regent in 1177 . raynald led the crusader army that defeated saladin at the battle of montgisard . he was the only christian leader to pursue an offensive policy against saladin , making plundering raids against the caravans travelling near his domains . he built a fleet of five ships which plundered the coast of the red sea , threatening the route of the muslim pilgrims towards mecca in early 1183 . saladin pledged that he would never forgive raynald . raynald was a firm supporter of baldwin iv 's sister , sybilla , and her husband , guy of lusignan , during conflicts regarding the succession of the king . sibylla and guy were able to seize the throne in 1186 due to raynald 's co-operation with her uncle , joscelin iii of courtenay . raynald attacked a caravan travelling from egypt to syria in late 1186 or early 1187 , claiming that the truce between saladin and the kingdom of jerusalem did not bind him . after raynald refused to pay a compensation , saladin invaded the kingdom and annihilated the crusader army in the battle of hattin . raynald was captured in the battlefield . saladin personally beheaded him after he refused to convert to islam . most historians have regarded raynald as an irresponsible adventurer whose lust for booty caused the fall of the kingdom of jerusalem . on the other hand , bernard hamilton says that he was the only crusader leader who tried to prevent saladin from unifying the nearby muslim states .