feeling is the nominalization of the verb to feel . originally used to describe the physical sensation of touch through either experience or perception , the word is also used to describe other experiences , such as '' emotion '' and of sentience in general . in latin , sentire meant to feel , hear or smell . in psychology , the word is usually reserved for the conscious subjective experience of emotion . vandenbos , gary ( 2006 ) apa dictionary of psychology . washington , dc : american psychological association phenomenology and heterophenomenology are philosophical approaches that provide some basis for knowledge of feelings . many schools of psychotherapy depend on the therapist achieving some kind of understanding of the client 's feelings , for which methodologies exist . perception of the physical world does not necessarily result in a universal reaction among receivers ( see emotions ) , but varies depending upon one 's tendency to handle the situation , how the situation relates to the receiver 's past experiences , and any number of other factors . feelings are also known as a state of consciousness , such as that resulting from emotions , sentiments or desires . feelings are only felt and are abstract in nature . they can not be touched . people buy products in hopes that the product will make them feel a certain way : perhaps happy , excited or beautiful . or , they find the product useful in some way , even indirectly such as to support a charity or for altruistic economic reasons . some people buy beauty products in hopes of achieving a state of happiness or a sense of self beauty or as an act or expression of beauty . past events are used in our lives to form schemas in our minds , and based on those past experiences , we expect our lives to follow a certain script . however , storytelling , commemoration and reservation of commemoration ( the unwillingness to overtly impose remembrances ) , research and investigation , and many other activities can help settle uneasy feelings without '' scripting '' , without the ambivalence that feeling can only be '' handled '' by proxy , which is not always true . a social psychologist , daniel gilbert , conducted a study on the influence of feelings on events alongside other researchers . the results showed that when the participants predicted a positive feeling for an event , the higher the chances that they wanted to relive the event . predicted feelings were either short-lived or did not correlate to what the participant expected .