sa'adiah ben yosef gaon / saʻīd bin yūsuf al-fayyūmi , sa'id ibn yusuf al-dilasi , saadia ben yosef aluf , sa'id ben yusuf ra 's al-kull ; . ; alternative english names : rabbeinu sa'adiah gaon ( '' our rabbi the saadia gaon '' ) , often abbreviated rsg ( r a s a g ) , saadia b . joseph , saadia b . joseph ( sa'id al-fayyumi ) , jewishencyclopedia.com ; article saadia ben joseph or saadia ben joseph of faym or saadia ben joseph al-fayyumi ; ( 882/892 – 942 ) the traditional birth year of 892 was exclusively cited before 1921 and is still occasionally cited . it rests on a statement by the twelfth-century historian abraham ibn daud that saadia was '' about fifty '' years old when he died . the modern birth year of 882 rests on an 1113 ce genizah fragment containing a list of saadia 's writings compiled by his sons eleven years after his death , which stated that he was '' sixty years less forty . days '' at death . henry malter , '' postscript '' , saadia gaon : his life and works ( 1921 ) 421–428 . jacob jocob mann , '' a fihrist of sa'adya 's works '' , the jewish quarterly review new series 11 ( 1921 ) 423-428 . malter rejected 882 because it was in conflict with other known events in saadia 's life . he suspected an error by a copyist . the year 882 is now generally accepted because its source is closer in both time and space to his death . abraham firkovich had previously held the opinion that saadia gaon was born in 862 , based on the view that he was aged twenty when he first began writing his sefer ha-iggaron in 882 ( see : abraham firkovich , hebrew newspaper hamelitz - 1868 , issue 26–27 ) bar ilan cd-rom was a prominent rabbi , gaon , jewish philosopher , and exegete of the geonim period who was active in the abbasid caliphate . saadia is the first important rabbinic figure to write extensively in judeo arabic . known for his works on hebrew language , halakha , and jewish philosophy , he was one of the more sophisticated practitioners of the philosophical school known as the '' jewish kalam '' . in this capacity , his philosophical work emunoth ve-deoth represents the first systematic attempt to integrate jewish theology with components of greek philosophy . saadia was also very active in opposition to karaism , in defense of rabbinic judaism .