in computing , a hardware random number generator ( hrng ) or true random number generator ( trng ) is a device that random number generation from a physical process , rather than by means of an algorithm . such devices are often based on microscopic phenomena that generate low-level , statistically random '' noise '' signals , such as thermal noise , the photoelectric effect , involving a beam splitter , and other quantum phenomena . these stochastic processes are , in theory , completely unpredictable , and the theory 's assertions of unpredictability are subject to experimental test . this is in contrast to the paradigm of pseudo-random number generation commonly implemented in computer programs . a hardware random number generator typically consists of a transducer to convert some aspect of the physical phenomena to an electrical signal , an amplifier and other electronic circuitry to increase the amplitude of the random fluctuations to a measurable level , and some type of analog-to-digital converter to convert the output into a digital number , often a simple binary digit 0 or 1 . by repeatedly sampling the randomly varying signal , a series of random numbers is obtained . the main application for electronic hardware random number generators is in cryptography , where they are used to generate random cryptographic keys to transmit data securely . they are widely used in internet encryption protocols such as transport layer security ( tls ) . random number generators can also be built from '' random '' macroscopic processes , using devices such as coin flipping , dice , roulette wheels and lottery machines . the presence of unpredictability in these phenomena can be justified by the theory of unstable dynamical systems and chaos theory . even though macroscopic processes are deterministic under newtonian mechanics , the output of a well-designed device like a roulette wheel can not be predicted in practice , because it depends on the sensitive , micro-details of the initial conditions of each use . although dice have been mostly used in gambling , and as '' randomizing '' elements in games ( e.g . role playing games ) , the victorian scientist francis galton described a way to use dice to explicitly generate random numbers for scientific purposes in 1890 . hardware random number generators generally produce only a limited number of random bits per second . in order to increase the available output data rate , they are often used to generate the '' seed '' for a faster cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator , which then generates a pseudorandom output sequence at a much higher data rate .