in sound recording and reproduction , and sound reinforcement systems , a mixing console is an electronic device for combining sounds of many different audio signals . inputs to the console include microphones being used by singers and for picking up acoustic instruments , signals from electric or electronic instruments , or recorded music . depending on the type , a mixer is able to control analog or digital signals . the modified signals are summed to produce the combined output signals , which can then be broadcast , amplified through a sound reinforcement system or recorded . mixing consoles are used in many applications , including recording studios , public address systems , sound reinforcement systems , nightclubs , broadcasting , television , and film post-production . a typical , simple application combines signals from microphones on stage into an amplifier that drives one set of loudspeakers for the audience . a dj mixer may have only two channels , for mixing two phonograph . a coffeehouse 's tiny stage might only have a six-channel mixer , enough for two singer-guitarists and a percussionist . a nightclub stage 's mixer for rock music shows may have 24 channels for mixing the signals from a rhythm section , lead guitar and several vocalists . a mixing console in a professional recording studio may have as many as 96 channels . in practice , mixers do more than simply mix signals . they can provide phantom power for condenser microphones ; pan control , which changes a sound 's apparent position in the stereo soundfield ; filtering and equalization , which enables sound engineers to boost or cut selected frequencies to improve the sound ; dynamic range compression , which allows engineers to increase the overall gain of the system or channel without exceeding the dynamic limits of the system ; routing facilities , to send the signal from the mixer to another device , such as a sound recording system or a control room ; and monitoring facilities , whereby one of a number of sources can be routed to loudspeakers or headphones for listening , often without affecting the mixer 's main output . some mixers have onboard electronic effects , such as reverb . some mixers intended for small venue live performance applications may include an integrated power amplifier .