a television advertisement ( also called a television commercial , commercial , advert , tv advert or simply an ad ) is a span of television programming produced and paid for by an organization . it conveys a message promoting , and aiming to market , a product or service . advertising and marketing may refer to television commercials as tvcs . for example : advertising revenue provides a significant portion of the funding for most privately-owned television networks . during the 2010s , the number of commercials has grown steadily , though the length of each commercial has diminished . advertisements of this type have promoted a wide variety of goods , services , and ideas ever since the early days of the history of television . the viewership of television programming , as measured by companies such as nielsen media research in the united states , or barb in the uk , is often used as a metric for television advertisement placement , and consequently , for the rates which broadcasters charge to advertisers to air within a given network , television program , or time of day ( called a '' daypart '' ) . in many countries , including the united states , television campaign advertising are commonplace in a political campaign . in other countries , such as france , political advertising on television is heavily restricted , fritz plasser , global political campaigning , p226 while some countries , such as norway , completely ban political advertisements . the first official paid television advertisement came out in the united states on july 1 , 1941 , over new york station wnbt ( subsequently wnbc ) before a baseball game between the brooklyn dodgers and philadelphia phillies . the announcement for bulova watches , for which the company paid anywhere from 4.00 to 9.00 ( reports vary ) , displayed a wnbt test pattern modified to look like a clock with the hands showing the time . the bulova logo , with the phrase '' bulova watch time '' , appeared in the lower right-hand quadrant of the test pattern while the second hand swept around the dial for one minute . '' imagery for profit '' r.w . stewart , the new york times , july 6 , 1941 . wnbt/bulova test pattern the first tv ad broadcast in the uk went on air on itv on september 22 , 1955 , advertising gibbs sr toothpaste . in asia , the first tv ad broadcast appeared on nippon television in tokyo on august 28 , 1953 , advertising seikosha ( subsequently seiko ) ; it also displayed a clock with the current time . : ja : コマーシャルメッセージ the television market has grown to such an extent that it was estimated to reach 69.87 billion for tv ad spending in the united states for 2018 .