in linguistics , and particularly phonology , stress or accent is the relative emphasis or prominence given to a certain syllable in a word or to a certain word in a phrase or sentence . that emphasis is typically caused by such properties as increased loudness and vowel length , full articulation of the vowel , and changes in tone . the terms stress and accent are often used synonymously in that context but are sometimes distinguished . for example , when emphasis is produced through pitch alone , it is called pitch accent , and when produced through length alone , it is called quantitative accent . when caused by a combination of various intensified properties , it is called stress accent or dynamic accent ; english uses what is called variable stress accent . since stress can be realised through a wide range of phonetic properties , such as loudness , vowel length , and pitch ( which are also used for other linguistic functions ) , it is difficult to define stress solely phonetically . the stress placed on syllables within words is called word stress or lexical stress . some languages have fixed stress , meaning that the stress on virtually any multisyllable word falls on a particular syllable , such as the penult ( e.g . polish ) or the first ( e.g . finnish ) . other languages , like english and russian , have variable stress , where the position of stress in a word is not predictable in that way . sometimes more than one level of stress , such as primary stress and secondary stress , may be identified . stress is not necessarily a feature of all languages : some , such as french and mandarin , are sometimes analyzed as lacking lexical stress entirely . the stress placed on words within sentences is called sentence stress or prosodic stress . that is one of the three components of prosody , along with rhythm and intonation . it includes phrasal stress ( the default emphasis of certain words within phrases or clauses ) , and contrastive stress ( used to highlight an item , a word or part of a word , that is given particular focus ) .