the book of the dead is an ancient egyptian funerary text generally written on papyrus and used from the beginning of the new kingdom ( around 1550 bce ) to around 50 bce . taylor 2010 , p.54 the original egyptian name for the text , transliterated rw nw prt m hrw , allen , 2000 . p.316 is translated as book of coming forth by day taylor 2010 , p.55 ; or perhaps '' utterances of going forth by day '' , d'auria 1988 , p . 187 or book of emerging forth into the light . '' book '' is the closest term to describe the loose collection of texts the egyptian book of the dead by anonymous ( 2 jun 2014 ) . with an introduction by paul mirecki ( vii ) consisting of a number of magic spells intended to assist a dead person 's journey through the duat , or underworld , and into the afterlife and written by many priests over a period of about 1,000 years . the book of the dead , which was placed in the coffin or burial chamber of the deceased , was part of a tradition of funerary texts which includes the earlier pyramid texts and coffin texts , which were painted onto objects , not written on papyrus . some of the spells included in the book were drawn from these older works and date to the 3rd millennium bce . other spells were composed later in egyptian history , dating to the third intermediate period ( 11th to 7th centuries bce ) . a number of the spells which make up the book continued to be separately inscribed on tomb walls and sarcophagi , as the spells from which they originated always had been . there was no single or archetype book of the dead . the surviving papyri contain a varying selection of religious and magical texts and vary considerably in their illustration . some people seem to have commissioned their own copies of the book of the dead , perhaps choosing the spells they thought most vital in their own progression to the afterlife . the book of the dead was most commonly written in hieroglyphic or hieratic script on a papyrus scroll , and often illustrated with vignettes depicting the deceased and their journey into the afterlife . the finest extant example of the egyptian book of the dead in antiquity is the papyrus of ani . ani was an egyptian scribe . it was discovered by sir e . a . wallis budge in 1888 and was taken to the british museum , where it currently resides .