mixed-member proportional representation ( mmp or mmpr ) is a mixed electoral system in which voters get two votes : one to decide the legislator for their single-seat constituency , and one for a political party . seats in the legislature are filled firstly by the successful constituency candidates , and secondly , by party candidates based on the percentage of nationwide or region-wide votes that each party received . the constituency representatives are elected using first-past-the-post voting ( fptp ) or another plurality/majoritarian system . the nationwide or region-wide party representatives are , in most jurisdictions , drawn from published party lists , similar to party-list proportional representation . to gain a nationwide representative , parties may be required to achieve a minimum number of constituency candidates , a minimum percentage of the nationwide party vote , or both . mmp differs from parallel voting in that the nationwide seats are allocated to political party in a compensatory manner in order to achieve proportional representation . under mmp , two parties that each receive 25 % of the votes may both end up with 25 % of the seats , even if one party wins more constituencies than the other . depending on the exact system implemented in a country and the results of a particular election , the proportionality of an election may vary . overhang seats may reduce the proportionality of the system , although this can be compensated for by allocating additional party list seats to cover any proportionality gap . mmp was originally used to elect representatives to the german bundestag , and has been adopted by bolivia , lesotho and new zealand . it was also used in romania during its 2008 and 2012 legislative elections . in germany , where it is used on the federal level and in most states , mmp is known as personalized proportional representation . in the united kingdom such systems used in scotland , wales , and the london assembly are referred to as additional member systems . in the canadian province of quebec , where an mmp model was studied in 2007 , it is called the compensatory mixed-member voting system ( système mixte avec compensation or smac ) .