eadbald was king of kent from 616 until his death in 640 . he was the son of king æthelberht and his wife bertha , a daughter of the merovingian king charibert . s . e . kelly , eadbald , oxford online dictionary of national biography , 2004 æthelberht made kent the dominant force in england during his reign and became the first anglo-saxon king to convert to christianity from anglo-saxon paganism . eadbald 's accession was a significant setback for the growth of the church , since he retained his people 's paganism and did not convert to christianity for at least a year , and perhaps for as much as eight years . he was ultimately converted by either laurentius or justus , and separated from his first wife , who had been his stepmother , at the insistence of the church . eadbald 's second wife was emma , who may have been a frankish princess . she bore him two sons , eormenred and eorcenberht , and a daughter , eanswith . eadbald 's influence was less than his father 's , but kent was powerful enough to be omitted from the list of kingdoms dominated by edwin of northumbria . edwin 's marriage to eadbald 's sister , æthelburg , established a good relationship between kent and northumbria which appears to have continued into oswald 's reign . when æthelburg fled to kent on edwin 's death in about 633 , she sent her children to francia for safety , fearing the intrigues of both eadbald and oswald . the kentish royal line made several strong diplomatic marriages over the succeeding years , including the marriage of eanflæd , eadbald 's niece , to oswiu , and of eorcenberht to seaxburh , daughter of king anna of east anglia . eadbald died in 640 and was buried in the church of st mary , which he had built in the precincts of the monastery of st peter and st paul in canterbury ( a church later incorporated within the norman edifice of st augustine 's ) . at that time , his relics were translated for reburial in the south transept ca . a.d . 1087 . see , e.g . , the guide booklet to st . augustine 's abbey ( london : english heritage , 1997 ) , 20 , 25 . he was succeeded by eorcenberht . eormenred may have been his oldest son , but if he reigned at all it was only as a junior king .