the polynesian languages form a language family spoken in geographical polynesia and on a patchwork of outliers from south central micronesia to small islands off the northeast of the larger islands of the southeast solomon islands and sprinkled through vanuatu . linguistic taxonomists classify them as a subgroup of the much larger and more varied austronesian family , belonging to the oceanic branch of that family . in terms of numbers of languages , the 38 members of the polynesian branch represent 7 percent of the 522 oceanic languages , and 3 percent of the austronesian family ( source : glottolog ) . polynesians share many unique cultural traits that resulted from only about 1000 years of common development , including common linguistic development , in the tonga and samoa area through most of the first millennium bc . there are approximately forty polynesian languages . the most prominent of these are tahitian , samoan , tongan , māori and hawaiian . as humans first settled the polynesian islands relatively recently and because internal linguistic diversification only began around 2,000 years ago , the polynesian languages retain strong commonalities . there are still many cognate words across the different islands , for example : tapu , ariki , motu , kava , and tapa as well as , the mythical homeland for some of the cultures . all polynesian languages show strong similarity , particularly in vocabulary . the vowels are often stable in the descendant languages , nearly always a , e , i , o and u . consonant changes tend to be quite regular . the legendary homeland of many polynesian peoples , reconstructed as sawaiki , appears as among the māori of new zealand , with s replaced by h ; but in the cook islands , with s replaced by the glottal stop , and w by v ; as , the name of the largest island in the hawaiian islands , with s replaced by h , and k by the glottal stop ; as , the largest island in samoa , with w replaced by v , and k by the glottal stop ; and as in the society islands , with s replaced by h , w replaced by v , and k by the glottal stop .