heinz wilhelm guderian ; 17 june 1888 & nbsp ; – 14 may 1954 ) was a german general during world war ii who , after the war , became a successful memoirist . an early pioneer and advocate of the '' blitzkrieg '' approach , he played a central role in the development of the panzer division concept . in 1936 , he became the inspector of motorized troops . at the beginning of the second world war , guderian led an panzer corps in the invasion of poland . during the battle of france , he commanded the armoured units that attacked through the ardennes forest and overwhelmed the allied defenses at the battle of sedan . he led the 2nd panzer army during operation barbarossa , the invasion of the soviet union . the campaign ended in failure after the german offensive operation typhoon failed to capture moscow , after which guderian was dismissed . in early 1943 , adolf hitler appointed guderian to the newly created position of inspector general of armoured troops . in this role , he had broad responsibility to rebuild and train new panzerwaffe but saw limited success due to germany 's worsening war economy . guderian was appointed acting chief of the general staff of the okh , immediately following the 20 july plot to assassinate hitler . guderian was placed in charge of the '' court of honour '' by hitler , which in the aftermath of the plot was used to dismiss people from the military so they could be tried in the '' people 's court '' and executed . he was hitler 's personal advisor on the eastern front and became closely associated with the nazi regime . guderian 's troops carried out the criminal commissar order during barbarossa , and he was implicated in the commission of reprisals after the warsaw uprising of 1944 . guderian surrendered to the united states forces on 10 may 1945 and was interned until 1948 . he was released without charge and retired to write his memoirs . entitled panzer leader , the autobiography became a bestseller , widely read to this day . guderian 's writings promoted several post-war myths , including that of the '' clean wehrmacht '' . in his autobiography , guderian portrayed himself as the sole originator of the german panzer force ; he omitted any mention of his relationship with hitler and the nazi regime or of war crimes . guderian died in 1954 and was buried in goslar .