henry ward beecher ( june 24 , 1813 – march 8 , 1887 ) was an american congregationalist clergyman , social reformer , and speaker , known for his support of the abolitionism , his emphasis on god 's love , and his 1875 adultery trial ( see below ) . his rhetorical focus on christ 's love has influenced mainstream christianity to this day . henry ward beecher was the son of lyman beecher , a calvinist minister who became one of the best-known evangelisms of his era . several of his brothers and sisters became well-known educators and activists , most notably harriet beecher stowe , who achieved worldwide fame with her abolitionist novel uncle tom 's cabin . henry ward beecher graduated from amherst college in 1834 and lane theological seminary in 1837 before serving as a minister in indianapolis and lawrenceburg , indiana . in 1847 , beecher became the first pastor of the plymouth church in brooklyn , new york . he soon acquired fame on the lecture circuit for his novel oratorical style in which he employed humor , dialect , and slang . over the course of his ministry , he developed a theology emphasizing god 's love above all else . he also grew interested in social reform , particularly the abolitionist movement . in the years leading up to the civil war , he raised money to purchase slaves from captivity and to send rifles—nicknamed '' beecher 's bibles '' —to abolitionists bleeding kansas . he toured europe during the civil war , speaking in support of the union . after the war , beecher supported social reform causes such as women 's suffrage and temperance . he also championed charles darwin 's theory of evolution , stating that it was not incompatible with christian beliefs . he was widely rumored to be an adulterer , and in 1872 the woodhull & claflin 's weekly published a story about his affair with elizabeth richards tilton , the wife of his friend and former co-worker theodore tilton . in 1874 , tilton filed charges for '' criminal conversation '' against beecher . the subsequent trial resulted in a hung jury and was one of the most widely reported trials of the century . beecher 's long career in the public spotlight led biographer debby applegate to call her biography of him the most famous man in america .