the culture of new zealand is essentially a western culture influenced by the unique environment and geographic isolation of the islands , and the cultural input of the indigenous māori people and the various waves of multi-ethnic migration which followed the history of new zealand . polynesian explorers reached the islands between 1250 and 1300 . over the ensuing centuries of polynesian expansion and settlement , māori culture developed from its polynesian roots . māori established separate tribes , built fortified villages ( pā ) , hunted and fished , traded commodities , developed agriculture , arts and weaponry , and kept a detailed oral history . regular european contact began from 1800 , and british immigration proceeded rapidly , especially from 1855 . colonists had a dramatic effect on the māori , bringing christianity , advanced technology , the english language , numeracy and literacy . in 1840 māori chiefs signed the treaty of waitangi , intended to enable the tribes to live peacefully with the colonists . however , after several incidents , the new zealand wars broke out from 1845 , with māori suffering a loss of land , partly through confiscation , but mainly through widespread and extensive land sales . māori retained their identity , mostly choosing to live separately from settlers and continuing to speak and write te reo māori . with mass migration from britain , a high māori death rate and low life expectancy for māori women , the indigenous population figure dropped between 1850 and 1930 , becoming a minority . european new zealanders ( pākehā ) , despite their location far from europe , retained strong cultural ties to '' mother england '' . these ties were weakened by the demise of the british empire and loss of special access to british meat and dairy markets . pākehā began to forge a separate identity influenced by their pioneering history , a rural lifestyle and new zealand 's unique environment . pākehā culture became prevalent after the wars , but after sustained political efforts , biculturalism and the treaty of waitangi became part of the school curriculum in the late 20th century , to promote understanding between māori and pākehā . more recently , new zealand culture has been broadened by globalisation and immigration from the pacific islands , east asia and south asia . non-māori polynesian cultures are apparent , with pasifika , the world 's largest polynesian festival , now an annual event in auckland . the development of a new zealand identity and national character , separate from the british colonial identity , is most often linked with the period surrounding world war i , which gave rise to the concept of the anzac spirit . many citizens prefer to minimise ethnic divisions , simply calling themselves new zealanders or , informally , '' kiwis '' . new zealand marks two national days of remembrance , waitangi day and anzac day , and also celebrates holidays during or close to the anniversaries of the founding dates of each province . new zealand has two national anthems of equal status , '' god save the queen '' and '' god defend new zealand '' – the latter of which is often sung with alternating māori and english verses .