st . regis mohawk reservation is a mohawk indian reservation in franklin county , new york , united states . it is also known by its mohawk name , akwesasne . the population was 3,288 at the 2010 census . the reservation is adjacent to the akwesasne reserve in ontario and quebec across the st . lawrence river . the mohawk consider the entire community to be one unit , and have the right to travel freely across the international border . the reservation contains the community of st . regis and borders the community of hogansburg in the town of bombay . the mohawk people dispute the town of bombay 's claim to jurisdiction within the '' bombay triangle '' , as these lands are part of the 1796 treaty with the united states and have never been diminished by the us congress . under the terms of the jay treaty ( 1794 ) , the mohawk people may pass freely across the canada–united states border . the two parts of the reservation are separated by the st . lawrence river and the 45th parallel . the mohawk are one of the original five nations of the iroquois league , historically based south of the great lakes and in present-day new york and pennsylvania . this nation was located primarily in the mohawk valley and were known as the '' keepers of the eastern door '' , prepared to defend the iroquoian territory against other tribes located to the east of the hudson river . the st . regis reservation , and the saint regis mohawk tribal government , adopted gambling in the 1980s . it has generated deep controversy . broadly speaking , the elected chiefs and the mohawk warrior society have supported gambling , while some traditional leaders have opposed it . today , the reservation is home to the akwesasne mohawk casino , which has generated revenues for tribal welfare . the elected tribal governments on the new york and canadian sides and the traditional chiefs of akwesasne often work together as a '' tri-council '' concerning areas of shared interest , for example to negotiate land claims settlements with their respective national governments . the saint regis mohawk tribe and the mohawk people view the reservation as a sovereign nation . under us treaty law , the federal government has jurisdiction over certain crimes on the reservation , but the mohawk have their own police force for other cases .