sir georg solti , ; born györgy stern ; 21 october 1912 – 5 september 1997 ) was a hungarian-born british orchestral and operatic conductor , best known for his appearances with opera companies in munich , frankfurt and london , and as a long-serving music director of the chicago symphony orchestra . born in budapest , he studied there with béla bartók , leó weiner and ernő dohnányi . in the 1930s , he was a répétiteur at the hungarian state opera and worked at the salzburg festival for arturo toscanini . his career was interrupted by the rise of the nazis ' influence on hungarian politics , and being of jewish background he fled the increasingly harsh hungarian anti-jewish laws in 1938 . after conducting a season of russian ballet in london at the royal opera house he found refuge in switzerland , where he remained during the second world war . prohibited from conducting there , he earned a living as a pianist . after the war , solti was appointed musical director of the bavarian state opera in munich in 1946 . in 1952 he moved to the oper frankfurt , where he remained in charge for nine years . he took west german citizenship in 1953 . in 1961 he became musical director of the the royal opera , london . during his ten-year tenure , he introduced changes that raised standards to the highest international levels . under his musical directorship the status of the company was recognised with the grant of the title '' the royal opera '' . he became an honorary citizen of the coastal holiday town of castiglione della pescaia , and a british subject in 1972 . in 1969 solti became music director of the chicago symphony orchestra , a post he held for 22 years . he conducted multiple recordings and high-profile international tours with the orchestra . solti relinquished the position in 1991 and became the orchestra 's music director laureate , a position he held until his death . during his time as the chicago symphony orchestra 's eighth music director , he also served as music director of the orchestre de paris from 1972 until 1975 and principal conductor of the london philharmonic orchestra from 1979 until 1983 . known in his early years for the intensity of his music making , solti was widely considered to have mellowed as a conductor in later years . he recorded many works two or three times at various stages of his career , and was a prolific recording artist , making more than 250 recordings , including 45 complete opera sets . the most famous of his recordings is probably decca 's complete set of wagner 's der ring des nibelungen , made between 1958 and 1965 . solti 's ring has twice been voted the greatest recording ever made , in polls for gramophone magazine in 1999 and the bbc 's music magazine in 2012 . solti was repeatedly honoured by the recording industry with awards throughout his career , including a record 31 grammy awards as a recording artist .