rogier van der weyden or roger de la pasture ( 1399 or 140018 june 1464 ) was an early netherlandish painter whose surviving works consist mainly of religious triptychs , altarpieces and commissioned single and diptych portraits . he was highly successful and internationally famous in his lifetime ; his paintings were exported & nbsp ; – or taken & nbsp ; – to italy and spain , deposition was taken by philip ii of spain and he received commissions from , amongst others , philip the good , netherlandish nobility , and foreign princes . campbell , 9 by the latter half of the 15th century , he had eclipsed jan van eyck in popularity . however his fame lasted only until the 17th century , and largely due to changing taste , he was almost totally forgotten by the mid-18th century . his reputation was slowly rebuilt during the following 200 years ; today he is known , with robert campin and van eyck , as the third ( by birth date ) of the three great early flemish artists ( vlaamse primitieven or '' flemish primitives '' ) , and widely as the most influential northern painter of the 15th century . campbell , 7 very few details of van der weyden 's life are known . campbell ( 1998 ) , 392 kemperdick , stephan , jochen sander , bastian eclercy , maître de flémalle , and rogier van der weyden . 2008 . the master of flémalle and rogier van der weyden . frankfurt am main : städel museum . p . 67 . the few facts we know come from fragmentary civic records . yet the attribution of paintings now associated to him is widely accepted , partly on the basis of circumstantial evidence , but primarily on the stylistic evidence of a number of paintings by an innovative master . van der weyden worked from life models , and his observations were closely observed . yet he often idealised certain elements of his models ' facial features , who were typically statuesque , especially in his triptychs . all of his forms are rendered with rich , warm colourisation and a sympathetic expression , while he is known for his expressive pathos and naturalism . his portraits tend to be half length and half profile , and he is as sympathetic here as in his religious triptychs . van der weyden used an unusually broad range of colours and varied tones ; in his finest work the same tone is not repeated in any other area of the canvas , so even the whites are varied . campbell , 11