in set theory , zermelo–fraenkel set theory , named after mathematicians ernst zermelo and abraham fraenkel , is an axiomatic system that was proposed in the early twentieth century in order to formulate a theory of sets free of paradoxes such as russell 's paradox . today , zermelo–fraenkel set theory , with the historically controversial axiom of choice ( ac ) included , is the standard form of axiomatic set theory and as such is the most common foundation of mathematics . zermelo–fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice included is abbreviated zfc , where c stands for '' choice '' , . '' zermelo-fraenkel axioms ( abbreviated as zfc where c stands for the axiom of choice '' and zf refers to the axioms of zermelo–fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice excluded . zermelo–fraenkel set theory is intended to formalize a single primitive notion , that of a hereditary well-founded set , so that all entities in the universe of discourse are such sets . thus the axioms of zermelo–fraenkel set theory refer only to pure sets and prevent its models from containing urelements ( elements of sets that are not themselves sets ) . furthermore , proper classes ( collections of mathematical objects defined by a property shared by their members where the collections are too big to be sets ) can only be treated indirectly . specifically , zermelo–fraenkel set theory does not allow for the existence of a universal set ( a set containing all sets ) nor for unrestricted comprehension , thereby avoiding russell 's paradox . von neumann–bernays–gödel set theory ( nbg ) is a commonly used conservative extension of zermelo–fraenkel set theory that does allow explicit treatment of proper classes . there are many equivalent formulations of the axioms of zermelo–fraenkel set theory . most of the axioms state the existence of particular sets defined from other sets . for example , the axiom of pairing says that given any two sets a and b there is a new set \ is simply defined as fy . this provides a simple notation for classes that can contain sets but need not themselves be sets , while not committing to the ontology of classes ( because the notation can be syntactically converted to one that only uses sets ) . quine 's approach built on the earlier approach of . virtual classes are also used in , , and in the metamath implementation of zfc .