peripheral membrane proteins are membrane proteins that adhere only temporarily to the biological membrane with which they are associated . these proteins attach to integral membrane proteins , or penetrate the peripheral regions of the lipid bilayer . the regulatory protein subunits of many ion channels and transmembrane receptors , for example , may be defined as peripheral membrane proteins . in contrast to integral membrane proteins , peripheral membrane proteins tend to collect in the water-soluble component , or fraction , of all the proteins extracted during a protein purification procedure . proteins with gpi anchors are an exception to this rule and can have purification properties similar to those of integral membrane proteins . the reversible attachment of proteins to biological membranes has shown to regulate cell signaling and many other important cellular events , through a variety of mechanisms . for example , the close association between many enzymes and biological membranes may bring them into close proximity with their lipid substrate ( s ) . membrane binding may also promote rearrangement , dissociation , or conformational changes within many protein structural domains , resulting in an activation of their biological activity . additionally , the positioning of many proteins are localized to either the inner or outer surfaces or leaflets of their resident membrane . this facilitates the assembly of multi-protein complexes by increasing the probability of any appropriate protein–protein interactions . image : monotopic membrane protein.svg thumb right 400px schematic representation of the different types of interaction between monotopic membrane proteins and the cell membrane : 1 . interaction by an amphipathic α-helix parallel to the membrane plane ( in-plane membrane helix ) 2 . interaction by a hydrophobic loop 3 . interaction by a covalently bound membrane lipid ( lipidation ) 4 . electrostatic or ionic interactions with membrane lipids ( e.g . through a calcium ion )