michail '' mikis '' theodorakis ; born 29 july 1925 ) is a greek composer and lyricist who has contributed to contemporary greek music with over 1000 works . athensnews interview : theodorakis ' call to arms famous composer theodorakis addresses protesters during a rally against a new austerity package , outside the university of athens , in 2011 embassy of greece international conference honors renowned composer mikis theodorakis ' 80th birthday an international conference dedicated to the work of famous music composer mikis theodorakis in honor of his 80th birthday , kicked off on friday in hania , crete . he scored for the films zorba the greek ( 1964 ) , z ( 1969 ) , and serpico ( 1973 ) . he composed the '' mauthausen trilogy '' , also known as '' the ballad of mauthausen '' , which has been described as the '' most beautiful musical work ever written about the holocaust '' and possibly his best work . he is viewed as greece 's best-known living composer . he was awarded the lenin peace prize . yearbook of the great soviet encyclopedia ( in russian ) . moscow : sovetskaya enciklopediya . 1983 politically , he is associated with the left because of his long-standing ties to the communist party of greece . he was an mp for the kke from 1981 to 1990 . nevertheless , in 1989 he ran as an independent candidate within the centre-right new democracy party , in order for the country to emerge from the political crisis that had been created due to the numerous scandals of the government of andreas papandreou , theodorakis : / the ways of the archangel , autobiography , volume v , p . 331 sq and helped establish a large coalition between conservatives , socialists and leftists . in 1990 he was elected to the parliament ( as in 1964 and 1981 ) , became a government minister under constantine mitsotakis , and fought against drugs and terrorism and for culture , education and better relations between greece and turkey . he continued to speak out in favor of left-liberal causes , greek–turkish–cypriot relations , and against the war in iraq . he has consistently opposed oppressive regimes and was a key voice against the 1967–1974 greek junta , which imprisoned him and banned his songs . theodorakis : journal of resistance