most of the settlements on the levels are small villages . in the south , aller , which has a population of 374 , includes the hamlet of beer ( sometimes bere ) and the deserted medieval village of oath on the opposite bank of the river parrett . the area known as the isle of athelney was once a very low isolated island linked by a causeway to east lyng , each end of which was protected by a semi-circular stockade and ditch . the ditch on the island is now known to date from the iron age , and was used by alfred the great as a fort before the battle of ethandun in may 878 ; in gratitude for his victory alfred founded a monastery , athelney abbey , on the isle in 888 , which survived until the dissolution of the monasteries under henry viii in 1539 . bawdrip is a small village which has a population of 498 . brent knoll is a large village at the foot of brent knoll camp that dominates the surrounding landscape ; the name means beacon hill in old english . brent knoll has been inhabited since at least the bronze age . before the somerset levels were drained , brent knoll was an island known as the isle ( or mount ) of frogs . glastonbury ( population 8,784 ) and street ( 11,066 ) lie on opposite sides of the river brue , and provide a central point for trade and commerce . larger centres are generally on slightly higher ground around the edges of the levels . bridgwater is a market town , the administrative centre of the sedgemoor district , and a major industrial centre . with a population of 33,698 , it straddles the major communication routes through south west england . situated on the edge of the somerset levels , along both banks of the river parrett and from its mouth , it was at one time a major port and trading centre . the hamlet of dunball forms part of the port on the river . burrowbridge lies on the river parrett further inland . the name probably comes from the old english ( fortified hill ) and ( bridge ) . in the village is burrow mump , an ancient earthwork now owned by the national trust . burrow mump is also known as st michael 's borough or tutteyate . it is a natural hill of triassic sandstone capped by keuper marl . excavations showed evidence of a medieval masonry building on the top of the hill . along the coast , settlements such as berrow are built on the line of sand dunes separating the low-lying marshes from the bristol channel . at the northern end bleadon lies on the river axe ; and there was for many years a small harbour , sometimes known as lympsham wharf . the arrival of the bristol and exeter railway in 1841 , which crossed the axe on a bridge , obstructed river traffic beyond the wharf , making it the limit of navigation for coastal vessels . an act of 1915 authorised the drainage of the river and installation of a flood gate at bleadon , although attempts to control the water had occurred on bleadon level since medieval times , including an early windmill , in 1613 , to pump water into the sea from behind a sea wall . burnham-on-sea ( population 18,401 ) is at the mouth of the river parrett where it enters bridgwater bay . the position of the town on the edge of the somerset levels has resulted in a history dominated by land reclamation and sea defences since roman times . burnham was seriously affected by the bristol channel floods , 1607 , and various flood defences have been installed since then . a concrete sea wall was built in 1911 , and after the second world war further additions to the defences were made , using the remains of a mulberry harbour ; the present curved concrete wall was completed in 1988 . highbridge , which neighbours burnham , is near the mouth of the river brue and the villages of east and west huntspill .