audio feedback ( also known as acoustic feedback , simply as feedback , or the larsen effect ) is a special kind of positive feedback which occurs when a sound loop exists between an audio input ( for example , a microphone or guitar pickup ) and an audio output ( for example , a power amplifier loudspeaker ) . in this example , a signal received by the microphone is amplifier and passed out of the loudspeaker . the sound from the loudspeaker can then be received by the microphone again , amplified further , and then passed out through the loudspeaker again . the frequency of the resulting sound is determined by resonance frequencies in the microphone , amplifier , and loudspeaker , the acoustics of the room , the directional pick-up and emission patterns of the microphone and loudspeaker , and the distance between them . for small pa systems the sound is readily recognized as a loud squeal or screech . the principles of audio feedback were first discovered by danish scientist søren absalon larsen , hence the name larsen effect . feedback is almost always considered undesirable when it occurs with a singer 's or public speaker 's microphone at an event using a sound reinforcement system or pa system . audio engineers typically use directional microphones with cardioid pickup patterns and various electronic devices , such as equalizers and , since the 1990s , automatic feedback detection devices , to prevent these unwanted squeals or screeching sounds , which detract from the audience 's enjoyment of the event and may damage equipment . on the other hand , since the 1960s , electric guitar players in rock music bands using loud guitar amplifiers , speaker cabinets and distortion effects have intentionally created guitar feedback to create different sounds including long sustained tones that can not be produced using standard playing techniques . the sound of guitar feedback is considered to be a desirable musical effect in heavy metal music , hardcore punk and grunge . jimi hendrix was an innovator in the intentional use of guitar feedback , alongside effects units such as the univibe and wah-wah pedal in his guitar solos to create unique sound effects and musical sounds .