a thermoplastic , or thermosoftening plastic , is a plastic polymer material that becomes pliable or moldable at a certain elevated temperature and solidifies upon cooling . most thermoplastics have a high molecular mass . the polymer chains associate by intermolecular forces , which weaken rapidly with increased temperature , yielding a viscous liquid . in this state , thermoplastics may be reshaped and are typically used to produce parts by various polymer processing techniques such as injection molding , compression molding , calendering , and extrusion . a . v . shenoy and d . r . saini ( 1996 ) , thermoplastic melt rheology and processing , marcel dekker inc . , new york . charles p . macdermott and aroon v . shenoy ( 1997 ) , selecting thermoplastics for engineering applications , marcel dekker inc . , new york . thermoplastics differ from thermosetting plastic ( or '' thermosets '' ) , which form irreversible cross link during the curing process . thermosets do not melt when heated , but typically decompose and do not reform upon cooling . above its glass transition temperature and below its melting point , the physical properties of a thermoplastic change drastically without an associated phase change . some thermoplastics do not fully crystallize below the glass transition temperature , retaining some or all of their amorphous characteristics . amorphous and semi-amorphous plastics are used when high transmittance is necessary , as light is scattered strongly by crystallites larger than its wavelength . amorphous and semi-amorphous plastics are less resistant to chemical attack and environmental stress cracking because they lack a crystalline structure . brittleness can be decreased with the addition of plasticizers , which increases the mobility of amorphous chain segments to effectively lower the glass transition temperature . modification of the polymer through copolymerization or through the addition of non-reactive side chains to monomers before polymerization can also lower it . before these techniques were employed , plastic automobile parts would often crack when exposed to cold temperatures . these are linear or slightly branched long chain molecules capable of repeatedly softening on heating and hardening on cooling .