lothal was one of the southernmost cities of the ancient indus valley civilization , located in the bhal region of the modern state of gujarat . construction of the city began around 2200 bce . discovered in 1954 , lothal was excavated from 13 february 1955 to 19 may 1960 by the archaeological survey of india ( asi ) , the official indian government agency for the preservation of ancient monuments . according to the asi , lothal had the world 's earliest known dock , which connected the city to an ancient course of the sabarmati river on the trade route between harappan cities in sindh and the peninsula of saurashtra when the surrounding kutch desert of today was a part of the arabian sea . however , this interpretation has been challenged by other archaeologists , who argue that lothal was a comparatively small town , and that the '' dock '' was actually an irrigation tank . leshnik , '' the harappan 'port ' at lothal '' the controversy was finally settled when scientists from the national institute of oceonography , goa discovered foraminifera ( marine microfossils ) and salt , gypsum crystals in the rectangular structure clearly indicating that sea water once filled the structure . lothal was a vital and thriving trade centre in ancient times , with its trade of beads , gems and valuable ornaments reaching the far corners of west asia and africa . the techniques and tools they pioneered for bead-making and in metallurgy have stood the test of time for over 4000 & nbsp ; years . lothal is situated near the village of saragwala in the dholka taluka of ahmedabad district . it is six kilometres south-east of the lothal-bhurkhi railway station on the ahmedabad-bhavnagar railway line . it is also connected by all-weather roads to the cities of ahmedabad ( 85 & nbsp ; km/53 & nbsp ; mi ) , bhavnagar , rajkot and dholka . the nearest cities are dholka and bagodara . resuming excavation in 1961 , archaeologists unearthed trenches sunk on the northern , eastern and western flanks of the mound , bringing to light the inlet channels and nullah ( '' ravine '' , or '' gully '' ) connecting the dock with the river . the findings consist of a mound , a township , a marketplace , and the dock . adjacent to the excavated areas stands the archaeological museum , where some of the most prominent collections of indus-era antiquities in india are displayed . the lothal site has been nominated as a world heritage site , and its application is pending on the tentative list of unesco . unesco