the ulster defence association ( uda ) is an ulster loyalism paramilitary mulholland , marc . northern ireland : a very short introduction . oxford university press , 2002 . p.80 group in northern ireland . it was formed in september 1971 as an umbrella group for various loyalist groups and undertook an armed campaign of almost twenty-four years as one of the participants of the troubles . its declared goal was to defend ulster protestant loyalist areas and to combat irish republicanism , particularly the provisional irish republican army ( ira ) . in the 1970s , uniformed uda members openly patrolled these areas armed with batons and held large marches and rallies . within the uda was a group tasked with launching paramilitary attacks ; it used the cover name ulster freedom fighters ( uff ) so that the uda would not be outlawed . the british government outlawed the '' uff '' in november 1973 , but the uda itself was not proscribed as a terrorist group until august 1992 . home office , government of the united kingdom – proscribed terrorist groups . retrieved 10 january 2010 . the uda/uff were responsible for more than 400 deaths . the vast majority of its victims were irish catholic civilians , – choose '' organisation '' as first variable and '' status summary '' as second variable – choose '' organisation '' as first variable and '' religion summary '' as second variable killed at random , in what the group called retaliation for ira actions or attacks on protestants . sarah nelson , ulster 's uncertain defenders : loyalists and the northern ireland conflict , published by appletree press , belfast , ( 1984 ) , pp.117–127 david mckittrick , ireland : 'many of belfast 's most deadly acronyms are now back in action , the independent , 20 january 1998 high-profile attacks carried out by the group include the top of the hill bar shooting , the milltown massacre , the sean graham 's and attack on james murray 's bookmakers , the castlerock killings , paddy wilson and irene andrews killings and the greysteel massacre . most of its attacks were in northern ireland , but from 1972 onward it also carried out bombings in the republic of ireland . the uda/uff declared a ceasefire in 1994 and ended its campaign in 2007 , but some of its members have continued to engage in violence . the other main loyalist paramilitary group during the conflict was the ulster volunteer force ( uvf ) . all three groups are proscribed organisations in the united kingdom under the terrorism act 2000 .