aflatoxins are toxicity carcinogens and mutagens that are produced by certain molds ( aspergillus flavus and aspergillus parasiticus ) which grow in soil , decaying vegetation , hay , and grains . they are regularly found in improperly stored staple food such as cassava , chili peppers , cottonseed , millet , peanuts , rice , sesame seeds , sorghum , sunflower seeds , maize , tree nuts , wheat , and a variety of spices . when contaminated food is processed , aflatoxins enter the general food supply where they have been found in both pet and human foods , as well as in feedstocks for agricultural animals . animals fed contaminated food can pass aflatoxin transformation products into eggs , milk products , and meat . for example , contaminated poultry feed is suspected in the findings of high percentages of samples of aflatoxin-contaminated chicken meat and eggs in pakistan . children are particularly affected by aflatoxin exposure , which is associated with stunted growth , delayed development , liver damage , and liver cancer . an association between childhood stunting and aflatoxin exposure has been reported in some studies but could not be detected in all . furthermore , a causal relationship between childhood stunting and aflatoxin exposure has yet to be conclusively shown by epidemiological studies , though such investigations are under way . adults have a higher tolerance to exposure , but are also at risk . no animal species is immune . aflatoxins are among the most carcinogenic substances known . after entering the body , aflatoxins may be metabolized by the liver to a reactive epoxide intermediate or hydroxylated to become the less harmful aflatoxin m 1 . aflatoxins are most commonly ingested . however the most toxic type of aflatoxin , b 1 , can permeate through the skin . the united states food and drug administration ( fda ) action levels for aflatoxin present in food or feed is 20 to 300 ppb . the fda has had occasion to declare both human and pet food recalls as a precautionary measure to prevent exposure . the term '' aflatoxin '' is derived from the name of one of the molds that produce it , aspergillus flavus . it was coined around 1960 after its discovery as the source of '' turkey x disease '' . aflatoxins form one of the major groupings of mycotoxins .