to a jewish family in kraków , von mark langer , in : blimp film magazine , no . 26 then part of the austria-hungary province of austrian poland . he was the second of six children of a tailor from dąbrowa tarnowska , aaron fleischer , who later changed his name to william in the united states , and malka '' amelia '' palasz . his family immigrated to the united states in march 1887 , settling in new york city , where he attended public school . during his early formative years he enjoyed a middle class lifestyle , the result of his father 's success as an exclusive tailor to high society clients . this changed drastically after his father lost his business ten years later . his teens were spent in brownsville , a poor jewish neighborhood in brooklyn . he continued his education at evening high school . he received commercial art training at cooper union and formal art instruction at the art students league of new york , studying under george bridgman . he also attended the mechanics and tradesman 's school in midtown manhattan . fleischer began his career at brooklyn eagle . beginning as an errand boy , he advanced to photographer , photoengraver , and eventually , staff cartoonist . at first he drew single-panel editorial cartoons , but then graduated to the full strips '' little algie '' and '' s.k . sposher , the camera fiend '' . these satirical strips reflected his life in brownsville and his fascination with technology and photography , respectively—both displaying his sense of irony and fatalism . it was during this period he met newspaper cartoonist and early animator , john randolph bray , who would later give him his start in the animation field . on december 25 , 1905 , fleischer married his childhood sweetheart , ethel ( essie ) goldstein . on the recommendation of bray , fleischer was hired as a technical illustrator for the electro-light engraving company in boston . in 1909 he moved to syracuse , new york , working as a catalog illustrator for the crouse-hinds company , and a year later returned to new york as art editor for popular science magazine under editor waldemar klaempffert .