the mayan languages in linguistics , it is conventional to use mayan when referring to the languages , or an aspect of a language . in other academic fields , maya is the preferred usage , serving as both a singular and plural noun , and as the adjective form . form a language family spoken in mesoamerica and northern central america . mayan languages are spoken by at least 6 million maya people , primarily in guatemala , mexico , belize , el salvador and honduras . in 1996 , guatemala formally recognized 21 mayan languages by name , achiʼ is counted as a variant of kʼicheʼ by the guatemalan government . and mexico recognizes eight within its territory . the mayan language family is one of the best-documented and most studied in the americas . modern mayan languages descend from the proto-mayan language , thought to have been spoken at least 5,000 years ago ; it has been partially reconstructed using the comparative method . the proto-mayan language diversified into at least six different branches : the huastecan , quichean , yucatecan , qanjobalan , mamean and chʼolan–tzeltalan branches . mayan languages form part of the mesoamerican language area , an sprachbund developed throughout millennia of interaction between the peoples of mesoamerica . all mayan languages display the basic diagnostic traits of this linguistic area . for example , all use relational nouns instead of prepositions to indicate spatial relationships . they also possess grammar and typological features that set them apart from other languages of mesoamerica , such as the use of ergativity in the grammatical treatment of verbs and their subjects and objects , specific inflectional categories on verbs , and a special word class of '' positionals '' which is typical of all mayan languages . during the pre-columbian era of mesoamerican history , some mayan languages were written in the logogram maya script . its use was particularly widespread during the classic period of maya civilization ( c . 250–900 ) . the surviving corpus of over 5,000 known individual maya inscriptions on buildings , monuments , pottery and bark-paper codices , combined with the rich post-conquest mesoamerican literature written in the latin script , provides a basis for the modern understanding of pre-columbian history unparalleled in the americas .