black propaganda is a form of propaganda intended to create the impression that it was created by those it is supposed to discredit . black propaganda contrasts with grey propaganda , which does not identify its source , and white propaganda , which does not disguise its origins at all . it is typically used to vilify or embarrass the enemy through misrepresentation . the major characteristic of black propaganda is that the audience are not aware that someone is influencing them , and do not feel that they are being pushed in a certain direction . ellul , jacques ( 1965 ) . propaganda : the formation of men ’ s attitudes , p . 16 . trans . konrad kellen & jean lerner . vintage books , new york . black propaganda purports to emanate from a source other than the true source . this type of propaganda is associated with psychological operations . linebarger , paul myron anthony . 1954 . psychological warfare , combat forces press , washington sometimes the source is concealed or credited to a false authority and spreads lies , fabrications , and deceptions . black propaganda is the '' big lie '' , including all types of creative deceit . jowett , garth s . , garth jowett , victoria o'donnell . 2006 . sage publications , thousand oaks , california black propaganda relies on the willingness of the receiver to accept the credibility of the source . if the creators or senders of the black propaganda message do not adequately understand their intended audience , the message may be misunderstood , seem suspicious , or fail altogether . governments conduct black propaganda for reasons that include : a ) by disguising their direct involvement a government may be more likely to succeed in convincing an otherwise unbelieving target audience , and b ) there are diplomatic reasons behind the use of black propaganda . black propaganda is necessary to obfuscate a government 's involvement in activities that may be detrimental to its foreign policies . shulsky , abram . and gary schmitt , silent warfare . washington , dc : brasseys inc . 2002