mohawk grammar allows for whole propositions to be expressed by one word , which we classify as a verb . the other core elements ( subjects , objects , etc . ) can be incorporated into the verb . well-formed verb phrases contain at the bare minimum a verb root and a pronominal prefix . the rest of the elements are not necessary . tense , aspect and modality are expressed via suffixes on the verb phrase as well . some examples : 12 ) katorats '' i hunt '' k-atorat-s i-hunt-habitual asp this is composed of three parts ; the pronominal prefix , the verb root and a suffix which marks aspect . mohawk seems to prefer aspect markers to tense to express grammaticalisation in time . 13 ) nyaʼtsvshayayaʼkeʼ '' …where he will cross over again from here to there… '' n-yaʼ-t-v-s-ha-yahyaʼk-eʼ partitive-translocative-dualic-future-iterative-noun-verb root-suffix '' where over here to there will again he cross . '' this example shows multiple prefixes that can be affixed to the verb root , but certain affixes are forbidden from coexisting together . for example , the aorist and the future tense affix will not be found on the same well-formed sentence . 14 ) vsenataraʼ '' you will make a visit '' v-se-natahr-aʼ future tense+ nominative pronoun + verb root + momentary asp suffix 15 ) asenataraʼ '' you should make a visit '' a-se-natahr-aʼ conditional mood prefix + nominative pronoun + verb root + momentary suffix 16 ) sanatahruneʼ '' you were visiting '' sa-natahr-u-hneʼ accusative pronoun + verb root + stative suffix + momentary suffix here , different prefixes and suffixes are used that mark tense , aspect and modality . most grammatical relations in mohawk are expressed through various different affixes onto a verb . subjects , objects , and relationships between subjects and objects are given their own affixes . in mohawk , each transitive relationship between subjects and objects are given their own prefix . for example : 17 ) a : ku-noruhkwa i-you + love '' i love you '' b : ri-noruhkwa i-him + love '' i love him '' c : ke-noruhkwa i-it/her + love '' i love it/her '' each of these affixes are denoting a transitive relationship between two things . there are more affixes for denoting transitive relationships like '' we-they '' , they-us ( inclusive/exclusive ) , etc . noun incorporation one of the features of mohawk called noun incorporation allows a verb to absorb a noun into it . when incorporation happens , an epenthetic a can appear between the noun root and the verb root . for example : 18 ) owiraʼa wahrakeʼ ne oʼwahru baby ate the meat with noun incorporation : 19 ) owiraʼa wahaʼwahrakeʼ baby meat-ate 20 ) waʼeksohareʼ '' she dish-washed '' ks dish , ohare wash 21 ) waʼkenaktahninuʼ '' i bed-bought '' nakt bed + a ( increment ) + hninu buy 22 ) wahanaʼtarakwetareʼ '' he bread-cut '' naʼtar bread + a ( increment ) + kwetar cut most of these examples take the epenthetic vowel a ; it can be omitted if the incorporated noun does n't give rise a complex consonant cluster in the middle of the word .