covent garden is a district in london , on the eastern fringes of the west end , between st martin 's lane and drury lane . it is associated with the former fruit-and-vegetable market in the central square , now a popular shopping and tourist site , and with the royal opera house , itself known as '' covent garden '' . the district is divided by the main thoroughfare of long acre , north of which is given over to independent shops centred on neal 's yard and seven dials , while the south contains the central square with its street performers and most of the historical buildings , theatres and entertainment facilities , including the london transport museum and the theatre royal , drury lane . the area was fields until briefly settled in the 7th century when it became the heart of the anglo-saxon trading town of lundenwic , then abandoned at the end of the 9th century after which it returned to fields . by 1200 part of it had been walled off by the abbot of westminster abbey for use as arable land and orchards , later referred to as '' the garden of the abbey and convent '' , and later '' the convent garden '' . following the dissolution of the monasteries it was granted in 1552 by the young king edward vi to john russell , 1st earl of bedford ( c.1485–1555 ) , the trusted adviser to his father king henry viii . the 4th earl commissioned inigo jones to build some fine houses to attract wealthy tenants . jones designed the italianate arcaded square along with the church of st paul 's . the design of the square was new to london and had a significant influence on modern town planning , acting as the prototype for new estates as london grew . by 1654 a small open-air fruit-and-vegetable market had developed on the south side of the fashionable square . gradually , both the market and the surrounding area fell into disrepute , as taverns , theatres , coffee-houses and brothels opened up . by the 18th century it had become notorious for its abundance of brothels . an act of parliament was drawn up to control the area , and charles fowler 's neo-classical building was erected in 1830 to cover and help organise the market . the market grew and further buildings were added : the floral hall , charter market , and in 1904 the jubilee market . by the end of the 1960s traffic congestion was causing problems , and in 1974 the market relocated to the new covent garden market about three miles ( 5 & nbsp ; km ) south-west at nine elms . the central building re-opened as a shopping centre in 1980 and is now a tourist location containing cafes , pubs , small shops , and a craft market called the apple market , along with another market held in the jubilee hall . covent garden falls within the london boroughs of westminster and camden and the parliamentary constituencies of cities of london and westminster and holborn and st pancras . the area has been served by the piccadilly line at covent garden tube station since 1907 ; the 300 yard journey from leicester square tube station is the shortest in london .