spiritism is a religion , self-described as a spiritualistic philosophy , that started in the 19th century by the french educator hippolyte léon denizard rivail , who , under the pen name allan kardec , wrote books on '' the nature , origin , and destiny of spirits , and their relation with the corporeal world '' . moreira-almeida , alexander ( 2008 ) . “ paralisia do sono '' revisado . allan kardec and the development of a research program in psychic experiences . proceedings of the parapsychological association & society for psychical research convention . winchester , uk . spiritists refer to kardec as the codifier . spiritist philosophy postulates that humans , along with all other living beings , are essentially soul that temporarily inhabit physical bodies for several necessary incarnations to attain moral and intellectual improvement . it also asserts that disembodied spirits , through passive or active mediumship , may have beneficent or malevolent influence on the physical world . lucchetti g , daher jc jr , iandoli d jr , gonçalves jp , lucchetti al . historical and cultural aspects of the pineal gland : comparison between the theories provided by spiritism in the 1940s and the current scientific evidence . neuro endocrinol lett . 2013 ; 34 ( 8 ) :745-55 . indexed on pubmed . spiritism is an theistic evolution religion . the term first appeared in kardec 's book , the spirits book , which sought to distinguish spiritism from spiritualism . spiritism is currently represented in 35 countries by the international spiritist council . international spiritist council , members website . it has influenced a social movement of healing centers , charity institutions and hospitals involving millions of people in dozens of countries , with the greatest number of adherents in brazil . spiritism is a major component of the syncretic afro-brazilian religion umbanda and also very influential in cao đài , a vietnamese religion started in 1926 by three spirit mediums who claimed to have received messages that identified allan kardec as a prophet of a new universal religion . hoskins , janet alison 2015 . the divine eye and the diaspora : vietnamese syncretism becomes transpacific caodaism . honolulu : university of hawaii press . p . 15 , 36 , 45 , 51,63 .