significant opposition to the iraq war occurred worldwide , both before and during the initial 2003 invasion of iraq by a united states–led coalition , and throughout the iraq war . people and groups opposing the war include the governments of many nations which did not take part in the invasion , including both its land neighbors canada and mexico , its nato allies in europe such as france and germany , as well as china and indonesia in asia , and significant sections of the populace in those that took part in the invasion . opposition to the war was also widespread domestically . rationales for opposition include the belief that the war is illegal according to the united nations charter , or would contribute to instability both within iraq and the wider middle east . critics have also questioned the validity of the war 's stated objectives , such as a supposed link between the country 's ba'athist government and the september 11 , 2001 attacks on the united states , and its possession of weapons of mass destruction '' certified '' by the niger uranium forgeries . the latter was claimed by the united states during the run-up to the war , but no such weapons were ever found . within the united states , popular opinion on the war has varied significantly with time . although there was significant opposition to the idea in the months preceding the attack , polls taken during the invasion showed that a majority of us citizens supported their government 's action . however , public opinion had shifted by 2004 to a majority believing that the invasion was a mistake , and has remained so since then . there has also been significant criticism of the war from us politicians such as bernie sanders , national security and military personnel , including generals such as anthony zinni and paul eaton who served in the war and have since spoken out against its handling , including calling for former secretary of defense donald rumsfeld resignation . lieutenant general gregory s . newbold , openly critical of rumsfeld 's plans for the invasion of iraq , resigned in protest prior to the invasion . worldwide , the war and occupation have been officially condemned by 54 countries and the heads of many major religions . popular anti-war feeling is strong in these and other countries , including the us ' allies in the conflict , and many have experienced huge protests totalling millions of participants .