in the late 1960s , mailer directed three improvisational avant-garde films : wild 90 ( 1968 ) , beyond the law ( 1968 ) , and maidstone ( 1970 ) . the latter includes a spontaneous and brutal brawl between norman t . kingsley , played by mailer , and kingsley 's half-brother raoul , played by rip torn . mailer received a head injury when torn struck him with a hammer , and torn 's ear became infected when mailer bit it . in 2012 , the criterion collection released mailer 's experimental films in a box set , '' maidstone and other films by norman mailer '' . in 1987 , he adapted and directed a film version of his novel tough guys do n't dance starring ryan o'neal and isabella rossellini , which has become a minor camp classic . mailer took on an acting role in the 1981 milos forman film version of e.l . doctorow 's novel ragtime , playing stanford white . in 1999 , he played harry houdini in matthew barney 's cremaster 2 , which was inspired by the events surrounding the life of gary gilmore . in 1976 , mailer went to italy for several weeks to collaborate with italian spaghetti western filmmaker sergio leone on an adaptation of the harry grey novel the hoods . although leone would pursue other writers shortly thereafter , elements of mailer 's first two drafts of the commissioned screenplay would appear in the italian filmmaker 's final magnum opus , once upon a time in america ( 1984 ) , starring robert deniro . mailer starred alongside writer/feminist germaine greer in d.a . pennebaker 's town bloody hall , which was shot in 1971 but not released until 1979 . in 1982 , mailer and lawrence schiller would collaborate on a television adaptation of the executioner 's song , starring tommy lee jones , roseanna arquette , and eli wallach . airing on november 28 and 29 , the executioner 's song received strong critical reviews and four emmy nominations , including one for mailer 's screenplay . it won two : for sound production and for jones as best actor . in 1987 , mailer was to appear in jean-luc godard 's experimental film version of shakespeare 's king lear , to be shot in switzerland . originally , mailer was to play the lead character , don learo , in godard 's unscripted film alongside his daughter , kate mailer . the film also featured a variable list of hollywood stars such as woody allen and peter sellers . however , tensions surfaced between mailer and godard early in the production when godard insisted that mailer play a character who had a carnal relationship with his own daughter . mailer left switzerland after just one day of shooting . in 2001 , he adapted the screenplay for the movie : master spy : the robert hanssen story . in 2005 , mailer served as a technical consultant on the ron howard boxing movie cinderella man , about legendary boxer jim braddock .