the glass–steagall legislation describes four provisions of the united states banking act of 1933 separating commercial and investment banking . . wilmarth 1990 , p . 1161 . the article 1933 banking act describes the entire law , including the legislative history of the provisions covered herein . as for the glass–steagall act of 1932 , the common name comes from the names of the congressional sponsors , senator carter glass and representative henry b . steagall . wilmarth 2008 , p . 560 . the separation of commercial and investment banking prevented securities firms and investment banks from taking deposits , and commercial federal reserve member banks from : dealing in non-governmental securities for customers , investing in non-investment grade securities for themselves , underwriting or distributing non-governmental securities , affiliating ( or sharing employees ) with companies involved in such activities . starting in the early 1960s , federal banking regulators ' interpretations of the act permitted commercial banks , and especially commercial bank affiliates , to engage in an expanding list and volume of securities activities . congressional efforts to '' repeal the glass–steagall act '' , referring to those four provisions ( and then usually to only the two provisions that restricted affiliations between commercial banks and securities firms ) , culminated in the 1999 gramm–leach–bliley act ( glba ) , which repealed the two provisions restricting affiliations between banks and securities firms . by that time , many commentators argued glass–steagall was already '' dead '' . most notably , citibank 's 1998 affiliation with salomon smith barney , one of the largest us securities firms , was permitted under the federal reserve board 's then existing interpretation of the glass–steagall act . in november 1999 , president bill clinton publicly declared '' the glass–steagall law is no longer appropriate '' . some commentators have stated that the glba 's repeal of the affiliation restrictions of the glass–steagall act was an important cause of the financial crisis of 2007–2008 . nobel memorial prize in economics laureate joseph stiglitz argued that the effect of the repeal was '' indirect '' : '' when repeal of glass-steagall brought investment and commercial banks together , the investment-bank culture came out on top '' . economists at the federal reserve , such as chairman ben bernanke , have argued that the activities linked to the financial crisis were not prohibited ( or , in most cases , even regulated ) by the glass–steagall act . mester , loretta j . '' optimal industrial structure in banking . '' ( 2005 ) .