the blue riband is an unofficial accolade given to the passenger ship crossing the atlantic ocean in regular service with the record highest speed . the term was borrowed from horse racing and was not widely used until after 1910 . traditionally , the record is based on velocity rather than passage time because ships follow different routes . also , eastbound and westbound speed records are reckoned separately , as the more difficult westbound record voyage , against the gulf stream and the prevailing weather systems , typically results in lower average speeds . kludas states that only westbound records counted for the blue riband , though this contradicts the other main sources on the subject ( eg . lee , gibbs , bonsor , and contemporary news sources ) which are clear that records in both directions qualified for the accolade . of the 35 atlantic liners to hold the blue riband , 25 were british , followed by five german , three american , as well as one each from italy and france . thirteen were cunarders ( plus queen mary of cunard white star ) , five by white star , with four owned by norddeutscher lloyd , two by collins , two by inman and two by guion , and one each by british american , great western , hamburg-america , the italian line , compagnie générale transatlantique and finally the united states lines . the record set by united states in 1952 remains unbroken by any passenger liner . the next-longest period through which the blue riband was retained was 19 years , held from 1909 to 1929 by mauretania . the shortest period was six weeks , by bremen from july to august 1933 . many of these ships were built with substantial government subsidies and were designed with military considerations in mind . winston churchill estimated that the two cunard queens helped shorten the second world war by a year . the last atlantic liner to hold the blue riband , the ss united states , was designed for her potential use as a troopship as well as her service as a commercial passenger liner . there was no formal award until 1935 , when harold hales donated the hales trophy ; though the rules for the hales trophy were different from the traditional rules for the blue riband ( for example , the hales trophy was originally only awarded for westbound records . ) and changed several times thereafter . it was awarded to just three blue riband holders during the express liner era . the trophy continues to be awarded , though many people believe united states remains as the holder of the blue riband , because no subsequent record breaker was in atlantic passenger service . the ocean rowing society created the blue riband trophy of ocean rowing awarded to the fastest crew to cross the atlantic ocean in an unsupported row boat . presently it is the most sought after trophy of ocean rowing .