the battle of brandywine , also known as the battle of brandywine creek , was fought between the american continental army of general george washington and the british army of general sir william howe on september & nbsp ; 11 , 1777 , as part of the american revolutionary war ( 1775–1783 ) . the forces met near chadds ford , pennsylvania , as howe philadelphia campaign , then the american capital . the british army routed the continental army and forced them to withdraw , first , to the city of chester , pennsylvania , and then northeast toward philadelphia . more troops fought at brandywine than any other battle of the american revolution . it was also the longest single-day battle of the war , with continuous fighting for 11 hours . howe 's army departed from sandy hook , across new york bay from the occupied town of new york city on the southern tip of manhattan island , on july 23 , 1777 , and landed near present-day elkton , maryland , at the point of the '' head of elk '' by the elk river at the northern end of the chesapeake bay , at the southern mouth of the susquehanna river . marching north , the british army brushed aside american light forces in a few skirmishes . general washington offered battle with his army posted behind brandywine creek ( christina river ) . while part of his army demonstrated in front of chadds ford , howe took the bulk of his troops on a long march that crossed the brandywine far beyond washington 's right flank . due to poor scouting , the americans did not detect howe 's column until it reached a position in rear of their right flank . belatedly , three divisions were shifted to block the british flanking force at birmingham friends meetinghouse and school , a quaker meeting house . after a stiff fight , howe 's wing broke through the newly formed american right wing which was deployed on several hills . at this point lieutenant general wilhelm von knyphausen attacked chadds ford and crumpled the american left wing . as washington 's army streamed away in retreat , he brought up elements of general nathanael greene 's division which held off howe 's column long enough for his army to escape to the northeast . poles general casimir pulaski defended washington 's rear assisting in his escape . the defeat and subsequent maneuvers left philadelphia vulnerable . the british captured it two weeks later on september & nbsp ; 26 , resulting the city falling under british control for nine months , until june of 1778 .