chinese nationalism is a form of nationalism in the people 's republic of china and taiwan ( republic of china ) which asserts that the chinese people are a nation and promotes the cultural and national unity of all chinese people . it is significantly distinct from han chauvinism , a sense of jingoism that is felt by purely han chinese people who deem themselves superior to other existing ethnicities ( typically minority ) in china . chinese nationalism emerged in the late qing dynasty ( 1636 & ndash ; 1912 ) in response to the humiliating defeat in the first sino-japanese war and the invasion and pillaging of beijing by eight-nation alliance . in both cases , the aftermath forced china to pay financial reparations and grant special privileges to foreigners . the nationwide image of china as a superior celestial empire at the center of the universe was shattered , and last-minute efforts to modernize and strengthen the old system were unsuccessful . these last-minute efforts were best exemplified by liang qichao , a qing dynasty reformer who failed to hundred days ' reform in 1896 and was later expelled to japan , where he began work on his ideas of chinese nationalism . the effects of world war i continually shaped chinese nationalism . despite joining the allied powers , china was again severely humiliated by the versailles treaty of 1919 which transferred the special privileges given to germany to the empire of japan . this resulted in the may fourth movement of 1919 , which developed into nationwide protests that saw a surge of chinese nationalism . large-scale military campaigns led by the kuomintang during the warlord era that overpowered provincial warlords and sharply reduced special privileges for foreigners helped further strengthen and aggrandize a sense of chinese national identity . after imperial japan was defeated in world war ii , chinese nationalism again gained tract as china recovered lost territories previously lost to japan , including manchuria and taiwan . however , the chinese civil war , ( which had paused in the face of japanese invasion ) had resumed , damaging the image of a unified chinese identity . the communists were victorious in 1949 , as the kuomintang retreated to taiwan . under mao zedong and chiang kai-shek , the chinese communist party ( ccp ) and the kuomintang simultaneously began to employ chinese nationalism as a political tool . using chinese nationalism , the kmt began to govern taiwan as an authoritarian one-party state by suppressing political dissidents and taiwanese aborigines , while the ccp began to suppress separatism and secessionist attitudes in tibet and among the uyghurs , a turkic minority in the far-west province of xinjiang , an issue that still persists even after the ideals of maoism had declined under the chinese economic reform .