carnatic music , known as or in the dravidian languages , is a system of music commonly associated with south india , including the modern indian states of karnataka , andhra pradesh , telangana , kerala and tamil nadu , and sri lanka . it is one of two main subgenres of indian classical music that evolved from ancient sanatana dharma sciences and traditions , the other subgenre being hindustani music , which emerged as a distinct form because of persian or islamic influences from northern india . the main emphasis in carnatic music is on vocal music ; most compositions are written to be sung , and even when played on instruments , they are meant to be performed in gāyaki ( singing ) style . the heptatonic scale of western musical notation is said to have its origins in carnatic music , having been picked up by pythagoras during his visit to india to learn mathematics , thus introducing it to the west . the circle of fifths and several other popular concepts in western classical music have their origins in the theory of carnatic classical music . although there are stylistic differences , the basic elements of ( the relative musical pitch ) , ( the musical sound of a single note ) , ( the mode or melodic formulæ ) , and ( the rhythmic cycles ) form the foundation of improvisation and composition in both carnatic and hindustani music . although improvisation plays an important role , carnatic music is mainly sung through compositions , especially the kriti ( or kirtanam ) – a form developed between the 14th and 20th centuries by composers such as purandara dasa and the trinity of carnatic music . carnatic music is also usually taught and learned through compositions . carnatic music is usually performed by a small ensemble of musicians , consisting of a principal performer ( usually a vocalist ) , a melodic accompaniment ( usually a violin ) , a rhythm accompaniment ( usually a mridangam ) , and a tanpura , which acts as a drone throughout the performance . other typical instruments used in performances may include the ghatam , kanjira , morsing , venu flute , veena , and chitraveena . the greatest concentration of carnatic musicians is to be found in the city of chennai . carnatic music . ( 2007 ) . in encyclopædia britannica . retrieved 12 april 2007 , from encyclopædia britannica online various carnatic music festivals are held throughout india and abroad , including the madras music season , which has been considered to be one of the world 's largest cultural events . the music academy written by malathi rangaswamy , secretary of music academy nettl2005 , p38