ethnography ( from greek ethnos '' folk , people , nation '' and grapho '' i write '' ) is a branch of anthropology and the systematic study of individual cultures . '' ethnography '' at dictionary.com . ethnography explores cultural phenomena from the point of view of the subject of the study . '' technical definition of ethnography '' , american ethnography ethnography is also a type of social research involving the examination of the behaviour of the participants in a given social situation and understanding the group members ' own interpretation of such behaviour . dewan m . ( 2018 ) understanding ethnography : an 'exotic ' ethnographer 's perspective . in : mura p . , khoo-lattimore c . ( eds ) asian qualitative research in tourism . perspectives on asian tourism . springer , singapore . as a form of inquiry , ethnography relies heavily on participant observation—on the researcher participating in the setting or with the people being studied , at least in some marginal role , and seeking to document , in detail , patterns of social interaction and the perspectives of participants , and to understand these in their local contexts . it had its origin in social and cultural anthropology in the early twentieth century , but spread to other social science disciplines , notably sociology , during the course of that century . ethnographers mainly use qualitative methods , though they may also employ quantitative data . the typical ethnography is a holistic study ember , carol and melvin ember , cultural anthropology ( prentice hall , 2006 ) , chapter one . heider , karl . seeing anthropology . 2001 . prentice hall , chapters one and two . and so includes a brief history , and an analysis of the terrain , the climate , and the habitat . a wide range of group and organisation have been studied by this method , including traditional communities , youth gangs , religious cults , and organisations of various kinds . while , traditionally , ethnography has relied on the physical presence of the researcher in a setting , there is research using the label that has relied on interviews or documents , sometimes to investigate events in the past such as the nasa challenger disaster . vaughan , d . ( 2016 ) the challenger launch decision ; risky technology , culture , and deviance at nasa , second edition , chicago ill , university of chicago press . there is also a considerable amount of 'virtual ' or online ethnography , sometimes labelled netnography or cyber-ethnography .