thomas andrew dorsey ( july 1 , 1899 – january 23 , 1993 ) was an american musician , composer , and evangelism influential in the development of early blues and 20th-century gospel music . he penned 3,000 songs , a third of them gospel , including '' take my hand , precious lord '' and '' peace in the valley '' . recordings of these sold millions of copies in both gospel and secular markets in the 20th century . '' thomas dorsey , father of gospel music , dies at 93 '' , the washington post , ( january 25 , 1993 ) , p . d6 . born in rural georgia , dorsey grew up in a religious family but gained most of his musical experience playing blues at juke joint and parties in atlanta . he moved to chicago and became a proficient composer and arranger of jazz and vaudeville just as blues was becoming popular . he gained fame accompanying blues belter ma rainey on tour and , billed as '' georgia tom '' , joined with guitarist tampa red in a successful recording career . after a spiritual awakening , dorsey began concentrating on writing and arranging religious music . aside from the lyrics , he saw no real distinction between blues and church music , and viewed songs as a supplement to spoken word preaching . dorsey served as the music director at chicago 's pilgrim baptist church for 50 years , introducing musical improvisation and encouraging personal elements of participation such as clapping , stomping , and shouting in churches when these were widely condemned as unrefined and common . in 1932 , he co-founded the national convention of gospel choirs and choruses , an organization dedicated to training musicians and singers from all over the u.s . that remains active . the first generation of gospel singers in the 20th century worked or trained with dorsey : sallie martin , mahalia jackson , roberta martin , and james cleveland , among others . author anthony heilbut summarized dorsey 's influence by saying he '' combined the good news of gospel with the bad news of blues '' . heilbut , pp . 28–29 . called the '' father of gospel music '' and often credited with creating it , dorsey more accurately spawned a movement that popularized gospel blues throughout black churches in the united states , which in turn influenced american music and parts of society at large .