tourism in singapore is a major industry and contributor to the singaporean economy , attracting 17.4 million international tourists in 2017 , more than 3 times of singapore 's total population . it is also environmentally friendly , and maintains natural and heritage conservation programs . along with this , it also has one of crime in singapore . as english is the dominant one of its four official languages , it is generally easier for tourists to understand when speaking to the local population of the country , for example , when shopping . transport in singapore exhaustively covers most , if not all public venues in singapore , which increases convenience for tourists . this includes the well-known mass rapid transit ( mrt ) system . singapore is the 5th most visited city in the world , and 2nd in asia-pacific . the travel and tourism competitiveness report 2017 ranks singapore 13th out of 136 countries overall , which was the third best in asia only behind japan ( ranked 4th ) and hong kong ( ranked 11th ) . the report ranks singapore 's business environment , international openness , also travel and tourism policy and enabling conditions as the best in the world ( ranked 1st ) . however , the island nation scored rather low in natural and cultural resources sub-index ( ranked 40th ) . the orchard road district , which is dominated by multi-storey shopping centres and hotels , can be considered the center of tourism in singapore . other popular tourist attractions include the singapore zoo , river safari and night safari , which allows people to explore asian , african and american habitats at night without any visible barriers between guests and the wild animals . the singapore zoo has embraced the 'open zoo ' concept whereby animals are kept in enclosures , separated from visitors by hidden dry or wet moats , instead of caging the animals , while the river safari , features 10 different ecosystems around the world , including the nile , yangtze river , mississippi , amazon as well as the tundra and has 300 species of animals , including numerous endangered species . jurong bird park is another zoological garden centred on birds , which is dedicated towards exposing the public to as much species and varieties of birds from around the world as possible , including a flock of one thousand flamingos . the tourist island of sentosa , which attracted 19 million visitors in 2011 , is located in the south of singapore , consists of about 20–30 landmarks , such as fort siloso , which was built as a fortress to defend against the japanese during world war ii . guns from the world war ii era can be seen at fort siloso , from a mini-sized to a 16 pound ( 7 & nbsp ; kg ) gun . moreover , the island has built the tiger sky tower , which allows visitors to view the whole of sentosa , as well as the sentosa luge , a small one- or two-person sled on which one sleighs supine and feet-first . steering is done by shifting the weight or pulling straps attached to the sled 's runners . among the latest tourists attractions built in singapore includes the two integrated resort which houses casinos , namely marina bay sands and resorts world sentosa , a universal studios singapore and gardens by the bay .