thumb discourse on the method of rightly conducting one 's reason and of seeking truth in the sciences is a philosophy and autobiographical treatise published by rené descartes in 1637 . it is best known as the source of the famous quotation '' je pense , donc je suis '' ( '' i think , therefore i am '' , or '' i am thinking , therefore i exist '' ) , garber , daniel . 1998 2003 . '' the cogito argument descartes , rené . '' in routledge encyclopedia of philosophy , edited by e . craig . london : routledge . retrieved 2017-11-12 . which occurs in part iv of the work . a similar argument , without this precise wording , is found in meditations on first philosophy ( 1641 ) , and a latin version of the same statement cogito , ergo sum is found in principles of philosophy ( 1644 ) . discourse on the method is one of the most influential works in the history of modern philosophy , and important to the development of natural sciences . davis , philip j . , and reuben hersh . 1986 . descartes ' dream : the world according to mathematics . cambridge , ma : harcourt ( publisher ) . in this work , descartes tackles the problem of skepticism , which had previously been studied by other philosophers . while addressing some of his predecessors and contemporaries , descartes modified their approach to account for a truth he found to be incontrovertible ; he started his line of reasoning by doubting everything , so as to assess the world from a fresh perspective , clear of any preconceived notions . the book was originally published in leiden , in the netherlands . later , it was translated into latin and published in 1656 in amsterdam . the book was intended as an introduction to three works : dioptrique , météores and géométrie . la géométrie contains descartes 's initial concepts that later developed into the cartesian coordinate system . the text was written and published in french rather than latin , the latter being the language in which most philosophical and scientific texts were written and published at that time . most of descartes ' other works were written in latin . together with meditations on first philosophy , principles of philosophy and rules for the direction of the mind , it forms the base of the epistemology known as cartesianism .