a puppeteer is a person who manipulates an inanimate object , called a puppet , to create the illusion that the puppet is alive . the puppet is often shaped like a human , animal , or legendary creature . the puppeteer may be visible to or hidden from the audience . a puppeteer can operate a puppet indirectly by the use of strings , rods , wires , electronics or directly by his or her own hands placed inside the puppet or holding it externally or any other part of the body- such as the legs . some puppet styles require two or more puppeteers to work together to create a single puppet character . the puppeteer 's role is to manipulate the physical object in such a manner that the audience believes the object is imbued with life . in some instances , the persona of the puppeteer is also an important feature , as with ventriloquist 's dummy performers , in which the puppeteer and the human figure-styled puppet appear onstage together , and in theatre shows like avenue q . the puppeteer might speak in the role of the puppet 's character , synchronising the movements of the puppet 's mouth . however , there is much puppetry which does not use the moving mouth ( which is a lip-sync innovation created originally for television where close-ups are popular ) . often , in theatre , a moveable mouth is used only for gestural expression , or speech might be produced by a non-moving mouth . in traditional glove puppetry often one puppeteer will operate two puppets at a time out of a cast of several . much work is produced without any speech at all with all the emphasis on movement . the relationship between the puppeteer and the puppet-maker is similar to that between an actor and a playwright , in cases where a puppet-maker designs a puppet for a puppeteer . very often , though , the puppeteer assumes the joint roles of puppet-maker , director , designer , writer and performer . in this case a puppeteer is a more complete theatre practitioner than is the case with other theatre forms , in which one person writes a play , another person directs it , and then actors perform the lines and gestures . puppetry is a complex medium sometimes consisting of live performance , sometimes contributing to stop frame puppet animation , and film where performances might be technically processed as motion capture , cgi or as virtual puppetry .