market harborough is a market town within the harborough district of leicestershire , england . it is situated in the far southeast of the county , forming part of the border with northamptonshire . harborough district has a population of 91,461 ( 2017 ) and market harborough is the district 's administrative headquarters . it sits on the northamptonshire-leicestershire border . the town was formerly at a crossroads for both road and rail ; however the a6 now bypasses the town to the east and the a14 which carries east-west traffic is to the south . market harborough railway station is served by east midlands railway services on the midland main line with direct services north to leicester , nottingham , derby and sheffield and south to london st pancras . rail services to rugby and peterborough ended in 1966 . market harborough is located in an area which was formerly a part of the rockingham forest , a royal hunting forest used by the medieval monarchs starting with william i . rockingham road takes its name from the forest . the forest 's original boundaries stretched from market harborough through to stamford and included the settlements at corby , kettering , desborough , rothwell , thrapston and oundle . the steeple of st dionysius ' church rises directly from the street , as there is no churchyard . it was constructed in grey stone in 1300 with the church itself a later building of about 1470 . next to the church stands the old grammar school , a small timber building dating from 1614 . the ground floor is open , creating a covered market area and there is a single room on the first floor . it has become a symbol of the town . the nearby square is largely pedestrianised and surrounded by buildings of varying styles . the upper end of the high street is wide and contains mostly unspoiled georgian buildings . market harborough has two villages within its confines : great bowden lies over a hill about a mile from the town centre ; little bowden is less than half a mile from the town centre . the three centres have largely coalesced through ribbon development and infill , although great bowden continues to retain a strong village identity .