in macroeconomics , the money supply ( or money stock ) is the total value of money available in an economy at a point of time . there are several ways to define '' money '' , but standard measures usually include circulation ( currency ) and demand deposits ( depositors ' easily accessed assets on the books of financial institutions ) . alan deardorff . '' money supply , '' deardorff 's glossary of international economics karl brunner , '' money supply , '' the new palgrave : a dictionary of economics , v . 3 , p . 527 . the central bank of each country may use a definition of what constitutes money for its purposes . money supply data is recorded and published , usually by the government or the central bank of the country . public and private sector analysts monitor changes in the money supply because of the belief that such changes affect the price levels of securities , inflation , the exchange rates , and the business cycle . the money supply – federal reserve bank of new york . newyorkfed.org . the relationship between money and prices has historically been associated with the quantity theory of money . there is strong empirical evidence of a direct relationship between the growth of the money supply and long-term price inflation , at least for rapid increases in the amount of money in the economy . for example , a country such as zimbabwe which saw extremely rapid increases in its money supply also saw extremely rapid increases in prices ( hyperinflation ) . this is one reason for the reliance on monetary policy as a means of controlling inflation . milton friedman ( 1987 ) . '' quantity theory of money '' , the new palgrave : a dictionary of economics , v . 4 , pp . 15–19 . the nature of this causal chain is the subject of some debate . some heterodox economics argue that the money supply is endogenous ( determined by the workings of the economy , not by the central bank ) and that the sources of inflation must be found in the distributional structure of the economy . lance taylor : reconstructing macroeconomics , 2006 in addition , those economists seeing the central bank 's control over the money supply as feeble say that there are two weak links between the growth of the money supply and the inflation rate . first , in the aftermath of a recession , when many resources are underutilized , an increase in the money supply can cause a sustained increase in real production instead of inflation . second , if the velocity of money ( i.e . , the ratio between nominal gdp and money supply ) changes , an increase in the money supply could have either no effect , an exaggerated effect , or an unpredictable effect on the growth of nominal gdp .