the phantom is an american adventure comic strip , first published by lee falk in february 1936 . the main character , the phantom , is a fictional costumed crime-fighter who operates from the fictional african country of bangalla . the character has been adapted for television , film and video games . the series began with a daily comic strip on february 17 , 1936 , followed by a color sunday strip on may 28 , 1939 ; both are still running as of . in 1966 , king features stated that the phantom was being published in 583 newspapers worldwide . ron goulart , '' the glory days , or believe it or not ! '' in dean mullaney , bruce canwell and brian walker , king of the comics : one hundred years of king features syndicate . san diego : idw publishing , 2015 . ( p.185 ) at its peak , the strip was read by over 100 & nbsp ; million people daily . '' when young lee falk wrote his first tale of the jungle ruler , the phantom , in 1936 , it is doubtful that he anticipated that 1995 would see a movie , a television series , an americanised futuristic version of his hero , merchandising , special-tribute editions to himself and international recognition from more than 100 million avid fans '' . julian lewis , '' the phantom phenomenon '' in the canberra times , saturday , february 11 , 1995 ( p.48 ) . falk worked on the phantom until his death in 1999 ; since his death , the comic strip has been written by tony depaul . since 2016 , it has been drawn by mike manley ( monday–saturday ) and , since 2017 , jeff weigel ( sunday ) . previous artists on the newspaper strip include ray moore , wilson mccoy , bill lignante , sy barry , george olesen , keith williams , fred fredericks , graham nolan , eduardo barreto , paul ryan , and terry beatty . in the strip , the phantom was 21st in a line of crime-fighters which began in 1536 , when the father of british sailor christopher walker was killed during a pirate attack . swearing an oath on the skull of his father 's murderer to fight evil , christopher began legacy hero which would pass from father to son . nicknames for the phantom include '' the ghost who walks '' , '' guardian of the eastern dark '' and '' the man who can not die '' . peter coogan , superhero : the secret origin of a genre . austin , tx : monkeybrain books , 2006 . ( p . 185 ) unlike many other superheroes , the phantom has no superpowers ; he totally relies on his strength , intelligence and the myth of his immortality to take action against the forces of evil . the 21st phantom is married to diana palmer ; they met while he studied in the united states and they have two children , kit and heloise . he has a trained wolf named devil and a horse named hero , and like the 20 previous phantoms he lives in the ancient skull cave . the phantom was the first fictional hero to wear the skintight costume which has become a hallmark of comic-book superheroes , and was the first shown in a mask with no visible pupils ( another superhero standard ) . the phantom : comic strip crusader ( 1996 a & e documentary ) , and article lee falk : father of superheroes from comic book resources no . 121 , may 2005 comics historian peter coogan has described the phantom as a '' transitional '' figure , since the phantom has some of the characteristics of pulp magazine heroes such as the shadow and the spider and earlier jungle heroes such as tarzan , as well as anticipating the features of comic book heroes such as superman , batman , and captain america .