the sanhedrin ( hebrew and jewish palestinian aramaic : סַנְהֶדְרִין ; greek : συνέδριον , synedrion , '' sitting together , '' hence '' assembly '' or '' council '' ) were assemblies of either twenty-three or seventy-one elders ( known as '' rabbis '' after the destruction of the second temple ) , who were appointed to sit as a tribunal in every city in the ancient land of israel . there were two classes of jewish courts which were called sanhedrin , the great sanhedrin and the lesser sanhedrin . a lesser sanhedrin of 23 judges was appointed to sit as a tribunal in each city , but there was only supposed to be one great sanhedrin of 71 judges , which among other roles acted as the supreme court , taking appeals from cases which were decided by lesser courts . in general usage , '' the sanhedrin '' without qualifier normally refers to the great sanhedrin , which was presided over by the nasi , who functioned as its head or representing president , and was a member of the court ; the av beit din or the chief of the court , who was second to the nasi ; and sixty-nine general members ( mufla ) . in the second temple period , the great sanhedrin met in the temple in jerusalem , in a building called the hall of hewn stones . the great sanhedrin convened every day except festivals and the sabbath day ( shabbat ) . after the destruction of the second temple and the failure of the bar kokhba revolt , the great sanhedrin moved to galilee , which became part of the roman province of syria palaestina . in this period the sanhedrin was sometimes referred as the galilean patriarchate or patriarchate of palaestina , being the governing legal body of galilean jewry . in the late 200s ce , to avoid persecution , the name '' sanhedrin '' was dropped and its decisions were issued under the name of beit hamidrash ( house of learning ) . the last universally binding decision of the great sanhedrin appeared in 358 ce , when the hebrew calendar was established . the great sanhedrin was finally disbanded in 425 ce after continued persecution by the eastern roman empire . over the centuries , there have been attempts to revive the institution , such as the grand sanhedrin convened by napoleon bonaparte , and modern attempts in israel .