jackson was raised in burlingame , california , an affluent suburb of san francisco , where her family resided in a two-story brick home located at 1609 forest view road . her relationship with her mother was strained , as her parents had married young and geraldine had been disappointed when she immediately became pregnant with shirley , as she had been looking forward to '' spending time with her dashing husband '' . jackson was often unable to fit in with other children and spent much of her time writing , much to her mother 's distress . geraldine made no attempt to hide her favoritism towards her son , barry , who explained his mother 's antagonism towards shirley by saying , '' geraldine was just a deeply conventional woman who was horrified by the idea that her daughter was not going to be deeply conventional . '' when shirley was a teenager , her weight fluctuated , resulting in a lack of confidence that she would struggle with throughout her life . jackson 's maternal grandmother , nicknamed '' mimi '' , was a christian science practitioner who continued to practice spiritual healing on members of the family after her retirement . jackson was known to critically assess such attempts , recounting a time when mimi claimed to have broken her leg and healed it through prayer overnight , though she had really only lightly sprained her ankle . when mimi died , jackson told her daughter that she '' died of christian science . '' while she believed that religion could easily become a vehicle for harm , the religious influences from her childhood are clear in jackson 's writing , including themes of mysticism , mental power , and witchcraft . she attended burlingame high school , where she played violin in the school orchestra . during her senior year of high school , the jackson family relocated to rochester , new york , after which she attended brighton high school , receiving her diploma in 1934 . she then attended the nearby university of rochester , where her parents felt they could maintain supervision over her studies . jackson was unhappy in her classes there , and took a year-long hiatus from her studies before transferring to syracuse university , where she flourished both creatively and socially . here she received her bachelor 's degree in journalism . while a student at syracuse , jackson became involved with the campus literary magazine , through which she met her future husband , stanley edgar hyman , who later became a noted literary critic . while attending syracuse , the university 's literary magazine published jackson 's first story , '' janice '' , about a teenager 's suicide attempt . after graduating , jackson and hyman married in 1940 , and had brief sojourns in new york city and westport , connecticut , ultimately settling in north bennington , vermont , where hyman had been hired as an instructor at bennington college . jackson began writing material as hyman established himself as a critic . jackson and hyman were known for being colorful , generous hosts who surrounded themselves with literary talents , including ralph ellison . they were both enthusiastic readers whose personal library was estimated at 25,000 books . they had four children , laurence ( laurie ) , joanne ( jannie ) , sarah ( sally ) , and barry , who later achieved their own brand of literary fame as fictionalized versions of themselves in their mother 's short stories . according to jackson 's biographers , her marriage was plagued by hyman 's infidelities , notably with his students , and she reluctantly agreed to his proposition of maintaining an open relationship . hyman also controlled their finances ( meting out portions of her earnings to her as he saw fit ) , despite the fact that after the success of '' the lottery '' and later work she earned far more than he did .