yeshua or y'shua with vowel pointing – yēšūă ‘ in hebrew ) was a common alternative form of the name ( '' yehoshua '' – joshua ) in later books of the hebrew bible and among jews of the second temple period . the name corresponds to the greek spelling iesous ( ἰησοῦς ) , from which , through the latin iesvs/iesus , comes the english spelling jesus . the hebrew spelling yeshua or y'shua appears in some later books of the hebrew bible . once for joshua the son of nun , and 28 times for joshua the high priest and other priests called jeshua – although these same priests are also given the spelling joshua in 11 further instances in the books of haggai and zechariah . it differs from the usual hebrew bible spelling of joshua y'hoshuaʿ ) , found 218 times in the hebrew bible , in the absence of the consonant he and placement of the semivowel vav ו after , not before , the consonant shin . it also differs from the hebrew spelling yeshu which is found in ben yehuda 's dictionary and used in most secular contexts in modern hebrew to refer to jesus of nazareth , although the hebrew spelling yeshua is generally used in bible translations into hebrew franz delitzsch hebrew new testament , matthew 1:1 , bfbs 1877 , isaac salkinsohn hebrew new testament matthew 1:1 , tbs 1891 and used by hebrew-speaking christians in israel . the name yeshua is also used in israelite hebrew historical texts to refer to other joshuas recorded in greek texts such as jesus ben ananias and jesus ben sira . robert e . van voorst jesus outside the new testament 2000 p124 '' this is likely an inference from the talmud and other jewish usage , where jesus is called yeshu , and other jews with the same name are called by the fuller name yehoshua , '' joshua '' '' in english , the name yeshua is extensively used by followers of messianic judaism , whereas east syriac christian denominations use the name isho in order to preserve the aramaic name of jesus . the 2004 film the passion of the christ , which was made in aramaic , used yeshua as the name of jesus and is the most well known western christian work to have done so .