blake is a surname or a given name which originated from old english . its derivation is uncertain ; it could come from '' blac '' , a nickname for someone who had dark hair or skin , or from '' blaac '' , a nickname for someone with pale hair or skin . another theory , presumably in the belief it is a welsh patronymic in origin , for which there is no evidence whatsoever , was that it is a corruption of '' ap lake '' , meaning '' son of lake '' . blake was the name of one of the 14 tribes of galway in ireland . these blakes were descendants of richard caddell , alias blake , who was involved in the norman invasion of ireland in 1169 . as such a long present foreign name it became known as de bláca in irish . the origins of the name blake are also considered to be old norse , first appearing in yorkshire , england , possibly derived from the word blaker , referring to a village and a former municipality of akershus county , norway ( east of oslo ) . the blake surname is first recorded in the latter half of the 12th century , making it one of the earliest on record . later interesting examples of the name in records taken from the dictionary of national biography include the famous admiral robert blake , 1599–1657 , who destroyed the spanish fleet at santa cruz , and died on the way home , and francis blake , who earlier in 1635 had embarked from london on the ship george bound for virginia . he is believed to have been the first of the many blakes to colonize new england . the first recorded spelling of the family name is believed to be that of walter le blake . this was dated 1167 , in the '' pipe rolls '' of the county of devonshire , and during the reign of king henry ii , known as '' the builder of churches '' , 1154–1189 . surnames became necessary when governments introduced personal taxation , and in most cases , but not necessarily this one , surnames in every country have continued to '' develop '' , often leading to astonishing variants of the original spelling . blake often refers to the british poet , painter and printmaker william blake ( 1757–1827 ) or to the contemporary figurative artist blake .