iraq actively researched and later employed weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) from 1962 to 1991 , when it destroyed its chemical weapons stockpile and halted its biological and nuclear weapon programs as required by the united nations security council . the fifth president of iraq , saddam hussein , was internationally condemned for his use of chemical weapons during the 1980s campaign against iranian and kurds civilians during and after the iran–iraq war . in the 1980s , saddam pursued an extensive biological weapons program and a nuclear weapons program , though no nuclear bomb was built . after the gulf war ( 1990–1991 ) , the unscom ( with the government of iraq ) located and destroyed large quantities of iraqi chemical weapons and related equipment and materials ; iraq ceased its chemical , biological and nuclear programs . cleminson , ronald . what happened to saddam 's weapons of mass destruction ? arms control association . september 2003 . in the early 2000s , the administrations of george w . bush and tony blair asserted that saddam hussein 's weapons programs were still actively building weapons , and that large stockpiles of wmds were hidden in iraq . inspections by the un to resolve the status of unresolved disarmament questions restarted between november 2002 and march 2003 , under united nations security council resolution 1441 , which demanded hussein give '' immediate , unconditional and active cooperation '' with un and iaea inspections , shortly before his country was attacked . the united states asserted that hussein 's frequent lack of cooperation was a breach of resolution 1441 , but failed to convince the united nations security council to pass a new resolution authorizing the use of force due to lack of evidence . despite this , bush asserted peaceful measures could not disarm iraq of the weapons he alleged it to have and launched a iraq war instead . a year later , the united states senate officially released the senate report of pre-war intelligence on iraq which concluded that many of the bush administration 's pre-war statements about iraqi wmd were misleading and not supported by the underlying intelligence . united states–led inspections later found that iraq had earlier ceased active wmd production and stockpiling ; the war was called by many , including 2008 republican presidential nominee john mccain , a '' mistake '' . iraq signed the geneva protocol in 1931 , the nuclear non-proliferation treaty in 1969 , and the biological weapons convention in 1972 , but did not ratify it until june 11 , 1991 . iraq ratified the chemical weapons convention in january 2009 , with its entry into force for iraq coming a month later on february 12 .