the latin empire , also referred to as the latin empire of constantinople , was a feudal crusader state founded by the leaders of the fourth crusade on lands captured from the byzantine empire . the latin empire was intended to replace the byzantine empire as the western-recognized roman empire in the east , with a catholic emperor enthroned in place of the eastern orthodox roman emperors . the fourth crusade had originally been called to retake the islam-controlled city of jerusalem but a sequence of economic and political events culminated in the crusader army sack of constantinople , the capital of the byzantine empire . originally , the plan had been to restore the deposed byzantine emperor isaac ii angelos , who had been usurped by alexios iii angelos , to the throne . the crusaders had been promised financial and military aid by isaac 's son alexios iv , with which they had planned to continue to jerusalem . when the crusaders reached constantinople the situation quickly turned volatile and while isaac and alexios briefly ruled , the crusaders did not receive the payment they had hoped for . in april 1204 , they captured and plundered the city 's enormous wealth . the crusaders selected their own emperor from among their own ranks , baldwin of flanders , and divided the territory of the byzantine empire into various new vassal crusader states . the latin empire 's authority was immediately challenged by byzantine rump states led by the laskaris family ( connected to the angelos dynasty of 1185–1204 ) in nicaea and the komnenos family ( which had ruled as byzantine emperors 1081–1185 ) in trebizond . from 1224 to 1242 the angelos family , also connected to the angeloi , challenged latin authority from thessalonica . the latin empire failed to attain political or economic dominance over the other latin powers that had been established in former byzantine territories in the wake of the fourth crusade , especially venice , and after a short initial period of military successes it went into a steady decline due to constant war with bulgaria to the north and the various byzantine claimants . eventually , the nicaean empire recovered constantinople and restored the byzantine empire under michael viii palaiologos in 1261 . the last latin emperor , baldwin ii , went into exile , but the imperial title survived , with several pretenders to it , until the 14th century . like the term '' byzantine empire '' , '' latin empire '' was not a contemporary term used by the empire itself or the rest of the world . the byzantines referred to the latin empire as the frankokratia ( φραγκοκρατία , lit . '' rule of the franks '' ) or the latinokratia ( λατινοκρατία , lit . '' rule of the latins '' ) and the latin emperors themselves referred to the empire by various names , commonly imperium constantinopolitanum ( lit . empire of constantinople ) , but also imperium romaniae ( lit . empire of romania ) and imperium romanorum ( lit . empire of the romans ) . the term romania ( '' land of the romans '' ) had been used unofficially by the population of the byzantine empire for their country for centuries .