maiden castle is an iron age hill fort south west of dorchester , in the english county of dorset . sharples ( 1991a ) , p . & nbsp ; 20 . hill forts were fortified hill-top settlements hillforts in britain . the earliest archaeology evidence of human activity on the site consists of a neolithic causewayed enclosure and bank barrow . in about 1800 & nbsp ; bc , during the bronze age , the site was used for growing crops before being abandoned . maiden castle itself was built in about 600 & nbsp ; bc ; the early phase was a simple and unremarkable site , similar to many other hill forts in britain and covering . around 450 & nbsp ; bc it was greatly expanded and the enclosed area nearly tripled in size to , making it the largest hill fort in britain and , by some definitions , the largest in europe . at the same time , maiden castle 's defences were made more complex with the addition of further ramparts and ditches . around 100 & nbsp ; bc , habitation at the hill fort went into decline and became concentrated at the eastern end of the site . it was occupied until at least the roman period , by which time it was in the territory of the durotriges , a celtic tribe . after the roman conquest of britain in the 1st century & nbsp ; ad , maiden castle appears to have been abandoned , although the romans may have had a military presence on the site . in the late 4th century & nbsp ; ad , a temple and ancillary buildings were constructed . in the 6th century & nbsp ; ad the hill top was entirely abandoned and was used only for agriculture during the medieval period . maiden castle has provided inspiration for composer john ireland and authors thomas hardy and john cowper powys . the study of hill forts was popularised in the 19th century by archaeologist augustus pitt rivers . in the 1930s , archaeologist mortimer wheeler and tessa wheeler undertook the first archaeology at maiden castle , raising its profile among the public . russell , m . ( 2019 ) , mythmakers of maiden castle : breaking the siege mentality of an iron age hillfort , oxford journal of archaeology , 38 : 325–342 . further excavations were carried out under niall sharples , which added to an understanding of the site and repaired damage caused in part by the large number of visitors . today the site is protected as a scheduled ancient monument and is maintained by english heritage .