the challenger 2 had been used in peacekeeping missions and exercises before , but its first combat use came in march 2003 during the invasion of iraq . 7th armoured brigade , part of 1st armoured division , was in action with 120 challenger 2s around basra . the type saw extensive use during the siege of basra , providing fire support to the british forces and knocking out iraqi tanks , mainly t-54/55s . the problems that had been identified during the large saif sareea ii exercise , held 18 months earlier , had been solved by the issuing of urgent operational requirements for equipment such as sand filters and so during the invasion of iraq the tank 's operational availability was improved . during the 2003 invasion of iraq , the challenger 2 tanks suffered no tank losses to iraqi fire . in one encounter within an urban area , a challenger 2 came under attack from irregular forces with machine guns and rocket propelled grenades . the driver 's sight was damaged and while attempting to back away under the commander 's directions , the other sights were damaged and the tank threw its tracks entering a ditch . it was hit by 14 rpg-7 from close range and a milan anti-tank missile . the crew survived , safe within the tank until it was recovered for repairs , the worst damage being to the sighting system . it was back in operation six hours later . one challenger 2 operating near basra survived being hit by 70 rpgs in another incident . 25 march 2003 : a friendly fire ( '' blue-on-blue '' ) incident in basra in which one challenger 2 of the black watch battlegroup ( 2nd royal tank regiment ) mistakenly engaged another challenger 2 of the queen 's royal lancers after detecting what was believed to be an enemy flanking manoeuvre on thermal equipment . the attacking tank 's second hesh round hit the open commander 's hatch lid of the qrl tank sending hot fragments into the turret , killing two crew members . the hit caused a fire that eventually led to an explosion of the stowed ammunition , destroying the tank . it remains the only challenger 2 to be destroyed on operations . august 2006 : an rpg-29 capable of firing a tandem-charge penetrated the frontal lower underbelly armour of a challenger 2 commanded by captain thomas williams of the queens 's royal hussars south east of amarah , southern iraq . the tank , which had already been hit by 10–15 rpgs , small arms and sniper fire , was attempting to draw fire away from another callsign that had become stricken . its driver , trooper sean chance , lost part of his foot in the blast ; two more of the crew were slightly injured . chance was able to reverse the vehicle to the regimental aid post despite his injuries . the incident was not made public until may 2007 ; in response to accusations that crews had been told the tank was impervious to the insurgents ' weapons , the mod said '' we have never claimed that the challenger 2 is impenetrable . '' since then , the explosive reactive armour has been replaced with a dorchester block and the steel underbelly lined with armour as part of the 'streetfighter ' upgrade as a direct response to this incident . 6 april 2007 : in basra , iraq , a shaped charge from an ied penetrated the underside of a tank resulting in the driver losing a leg and causing minor injuries to another soldier . to help prevent incidents of this nature , challenger 2s have been upgraded with a new passive armour package , including the use of add-on armour manufactured by rafael advanced defense systems of israel . british next generation armour , tankograd british special no . 9009 , dan hay when deployed on operations the challenger 2 is now normally upgraded to tes ( theatre entry standard ) , which includes a number of modifications including armour and weapon system upgrades .