a hookah ( hindustani : ( huqqā ) ( devanagari ) , ( nastaleeq ) , ipa : ; also see other names ) , also known as the qalyān or shisha , is a single- or multi-stemmed instrument for heating or vaporizing and then smoking either tobacco , flavored tobacco ( often mu ‘ assel ) , or sometimes cannabis , hashish , and in the past opium . the smoke is passed through a water basin—often glass-based—before inhalation . the health risks of smoking through a hookah include exposure to toxic chemicals that are not filtered out by the water and risk of infectious disease when hookahs are shared . there are two theories regarding the origin of the hookah . the first is that following the introduction of tobacco to medieval india by the jesuits , and since then tobacco use became widespread . the hookah or waterpipe was invented by abu ’ l-fath gilani , a persian physician of akbar , in the indian city of fatehpur sikri during mughal india ; the hookah spread from the indian subcontinent to persia first , where the mechanism was modified to its current shape , and then to the near east . alternatively , it could have originated in the safavid dynasty of persia , from where it eventually spread to the indian subcontinent . despite tobacco and drug use being considered a taboo when the hookah was first conceived , its use became increasingly popular among nobility and subsequently widely accepted . gradually , burned tobacco has been commonly replaced by vaporizing flavored shisha . still the original hookah is often used in rural south asia , which continues to use tumbak ( a pure and coarse form of unflavored tobacco leaves ) and smoked by burning it directly with charcoal . while this method delivers a much higher content of tobacco and nicotine , it also imposes more adverse health effects compared to vaporized shisha hookahs . the word hookah is a derivative of '' huqqa '' , a hindustani word , of arabic origin ( derived from ḥuqqa , '' casket , bottle , water pipe '' ) . outside its native region , hookah smoking has gained popularity throughout the world , especially among younger people .