data general was one of the first minicomputer firms of the late 1960s . three of the four founders were former employees of digital equipment corporation ( dec ) . their first product , 1969 's data general nova , was a 16-bit minicomputer intended to both outperform and cost less than the equivalent from dec , the 12-bit pdp-8 . a basic nova system cost or less than a similar pdp-8 while running faster , offering easy expandability , being significantly smaller , and proving more reliable in the field . combined with data general rdos ( dg/rdos ) and programming languages like data general business basic , novas provided a multi-user platform far ahead of many contemporary systems . a series of updated nova machines were released through the early 1970s that kept the nova line at the front of the 16-bit mini world . the nova was followed by the eclipse series which offered much larger memory capacity while still being able to run nova code without modification . the eclipse launch was marred by production problems and it was some time before it was a reliable replacement for the tens of thousands of nova 's in the market . as the mini world moved from 16-bit to 32 , dg introduced the data general eclipse mv/8000 , whose development was extensively documented in the popular book , the soul of a new machine . although successful , the introduction of the ibm pc in 1981 marked the beginning of the end for minicomputers , and by the end of the decade , the entire market had largely disappeared . the introduction of the data general-one in 1984 did nothing to stop the erosion . in a major business pivot , in 1989 dg released the aviion series of scalable unix systems which spanned from desktop workstations to departmental servers . this scalability was managed through the use of numa , allowing a number of commodity processors to work together in a single system . following aviion was the clariion series of network attached storage systems which became a major product line in the later 1990s . this led to a purchase by emc , the major vendor in the storage space at that time . emc shut down all of dg 's lines except for clariion , which continued sales until 2012 .