belvoir castle ) is a historic castle and stately home in leicestershire , england , situated 10 km west of the town of grantham and 16 km north-east of melton mowbray . the castle was first built immediately after the norman conquest of 1066 and has since been rebuilt at least three times , the surviving structure , a grade i listed building , dating from the early 19th century . it is the seat of david manners , 11th duke of rutland ( the tiny county of rutland lies 25 km south based on position of oakham , county town of rutland of belvoir castle ) , whose direct male ancestor inherited it in 1508 . his secondary seat is haddon hall in derbyshire . kidd , charles , debrett 's peerage & baronetage 2015 edition , london , 2015 , p.1074 the traditional burial place of the manners family was in the parish church of st mary the virgin , bottesford , situated 5 km to the north of the castle , but since 1825 they have been buried in the ducal mausoleum built next to the castle in that year , to which their ancient monuments were moved . it remains the private property of the duke of rutland but is open to the general public . the castle is situated at the extreme northerly corner of the county of leicestershire and is sandwiched between lincolnshire to the east and nottinghamshire at west , and overlooks the vale of belvoir to the north-west on the nottinghamshire border . it is surrounded by the villages of redmile , woolsthorpe , knipton , harston , harlaxton , croxton kerrial and bottesford . the antiquarian john leland ( d.1552 ) stated : '' the castle stands on the very nape of a high hill , steep up each way , partly by nature , partly by the working of men 's hands . '' quoted in cantor 1977–1978 p . 35 . the 15,000 acre ( 6,000 hectare ) belvoir estate , situated in the heart of england 's prime fox-hunting terrain , perfectly suited to equestrian sport due to largely flat and cleared land with many hedges and small streams suited for jumping is the headquarters of the famous belvoir hunt ( '' the duke of rutland 's hounds '' established in 1750 and now kennelled 1 km south-east of the castle .