josé sarney de araújo costa ; born josé ribamar ferreira de araújo costa ; 24 april 1930 ) is a brazilian politician , lawyer , and writer who served as 31st president of brazil from 21 april 1985 to 15 march 1990 . at age , he is the oldest living former brazilian president , and , as of the death of joão figueiredo in 1999 , one of only two living former presidents not elected by direct vote ; the other is michel temer . sarney ascended in the politics of his home state of maranhão as part of the '' bossa nova generation '' of udn politicians in the 1950s , young idealists seeking to reorganize public administration and rid the government of corruption and old deleterious practices . during the brazilian military dictatorship , which imposed a two-party system , sarney affiliated himself with the government party , arena , becoming the president of the party in 1979 . as the regime fell , however , arena split over the appointment of paulo maluf as its presidential candidate . sarney joined the dissenters , and was instrumental in the creation of the democrats ( brazil ) . he agreed to run for vice-president on the ticket of tancredo neves of pmdb , formerly the opposition party to the military government . neves won the presidential election , but fell ill and died before taking office , and sarney became president . he started out his term with great popularity , but public opinion shifted with the brazilian debt crisis and the failure of plano cruzado to abate chronic inflation . his government is seen today as disastrous and clientelism was widespread having longlasting consequences for the brazilian republic post military dictatorship . over time , sarney and his family acquired enormous clout over maranhão 's public life , and he is today regarded as the foremost of brazil 's oligarchy . sarney owns the most important newspapers and tv stations in maranhão , and remains influential there . sarney has also faced multiple allegations of nepotism and corruption in his career . in 2009 , the british weekly the economist called his election as president of the senate '' a victory for semi-feudalism '' and '' a throwback to an era of semi-feudal politics that still prevails in corners of brazil and holds the rest of it back . '' '' where dinosaurs still roam '' , the economist , 5 february 2009 . veja columnist roberto pompeu de toledo deemed him '' the perfect oligarch '' . veja – o oligarca perfeito sarney is also an accomplished writer , and a member of the brazilian academy of letters .