sewage sludge is the residual , semi-solid material that is produced as a by-product during sewage treatment of industrial or municipal wastewater . the term '' septage '' also refers to sludge from simple wastewater treatment but is connected to simple on-site sanitation systems , such as septic tanks . when fresh sewage or wastewater enters a primary settling tank , approximately 50 % of the suspended solid matter will settle out in an hour and a half . this collection of solids is known as raw sludge or primary solids and is said to be '' fresh '' before anaerobic processes become active . the sludge will become putrescent in a short time once anaerobic bacteria take over , and must be removed from the sedimentation tank before this happens . this is accomplished in one of two ways . most commonly , the fresh sludge is continuously extracted from the bottom of a hopper-shaped tank by mechanical scrapers and passed to separate sludge-digestion tanks . in some treatment plants an imhoff tank is used : sludge settles through a slot into the lower story or digestion chamber , where it is decomposed by anaerobic bacteria , resulting in liquefaction and reduced volume of the sludge . the secondary treatment process also generates a sludge largely composed of bacteria and protozoa with entrained fine solids , and this is removed by settlement in secondary settlement tanks . both sludge streams are typically combined and are processed by anaerobic or aerobic treatment process at either elevated or ambient temperatures . after digesting for an extended period , the result is called '' digested '' sludge and may be disposed of by drying and then landfilling . '' biosolids '' is a term often used in conjunction with reuse of sewage solids after sewage sludge treatment . biosolids can be defined as organic wastewater solids that can be reused after stabilization processes such as anaerobic digestion and composting . opponents of sewage sludge reuse reject this term as a public relations term .