ijtihad , ; lit . physical or mental effort , expended in a particular activity ) is an islamic legal term referring to independent reasoning or the thorough exertion of a jurist 's mental faculty in finding a solution to a legal question . it is contrasted with taqlid ( imitation , conformity to legal precedent ) . according to classical sunni theory , ijtihad requires expertise in the arabic language , theology , revealed texts , and principles of jurisprudence ( usul al-fiqh ) , and is not employed where authentic and authoritative texts ( qur'an and hadith ) are considered unambiguous with regard to the question , or where there is an existing scholarly consensus ( ijma ) . ijtihad is considered to be a religious duty for those qualified to perform it . an islamic scholar who is qualified to perform ijtihad is called a mujtahid . by the beginning of the 10th century , development of sunni jurisprudence prompted leading sunni jurists to state that the main legal questions had been addressed and the scope of ijtihad was gradually restricted . in the modern era , this gave rise to a perception among western scholars and lay muslim public that the so-called '' gate of ijtihad '' was closed at the start of the classical era . while recent scholarship has disproved this notion , the extent and mechanisms of legal change in the post-formative period remain a subject of debate . starting from the 18th century , some muslim reformers began calling for abandonment of taqlid and emphasis on ijtihad , which they saw as a return to islamic origins . public debates in the muslim world surrounding ijtihad continue to the present day . the advocacy of ijtihad has been particularly associated with islamic modernism and purist salafi thinkers . among contemporary muslims in the west there have emerged new visions of ijtihad which emphasize substantive moral values over traditional juridical methodology . shia jurists did not use the term ijtihad until the 12th century , but they employed a rational mode of legal reasoning from the early period , and its scope was not narrowed as in the sunni tradition , with the exception of zaydi jurisprudence .