an investment bank is a financial services company or corporate division that engages in advisory-based financial transactions on behalf of individuals , corporations , and governments . traditionally associated with corporate finance , such a bank might assist in raising financial capital by underwriting or acting as the client 's agent in the issuer of securities . an investment bank may also assist company involved in mergers and acquisitions ( m & a ) and provide ancillary services such as market maker , trading of derivatives and stock , and ficc services ( fixed income instruments , currencies , and commodity ) . most investment banks maintain prime brokerage and asset management departments in conjunction with their securities research businesses . as an industry , it is broken up into the bulge bracket ( upper tier ) , middle market ( mid-level businesses ) , and boutique market ( specialized businesses ) . unlike commercial banks and retail banks , investment banks do not take deposits . from the passage of glass–steagall act in 1933 until its repeal in 1999 by the gramm–leach–bliley act , the united states maintained a separation between investment banking and commercial banks . other industrialized countries , including g7 countries , have historically not maintained such a separation . as part of the dodd–frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd–frank act of 2010 ) , the volcker rule asserts some institutional separation of investment banking services from commercial banking . all investment banking activity is classed as either '' sell side '' or '' buy side '' . the '' sell side '' involves trading securities for cash or for other securities ( e.g . facilitating transactions , market-making ) , or the promotion of securities ( e.g . underwriting , research , etc . ) . the '' buy side '' involves the provision of advice to institutions that buy investment services . private equity funds , mutual funds , life insurance companies , unit trusts , and hedge funds are the most common types of buy-side entities . an investment bank can also be split into private and public functions with a screen separating the two to prevent information from crossing . the private areas of the bank deal with private insider information that may not be publicly disclosed , while the public areas , such as stock analysis , deal with public information . an advisor who provides investment banking services in the united states must be a licensed broker-dealer and subject to u.s . securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and financial industry regulatory authority ( finra ) regulation . u.s . securities and exchange commission