in physics , a virtual particle is a transient quantum fluctuation that exhibits some of the characteristics of an ordinary particle , while having its existence limited by the uncertainty principle . the concept of virtual particles arises in perturbation theory of quantum field theory where interactions between ordinary particles are described in terms of exchanges of virtual particles . a process involving virtual particles can be described by a schematic representation known as a feynman diagram , in which virtual particles are represented by internal lines . peskin , m.e . , schroeder , d.v . ( 1995 ) . an introduction to quantum field theory , westview press , , p . 80 . mandl , f . , shaw , g . ( 1984/2002 ) . quantum field theory , john wiley & sons , chichester uk , revised edition , , pp . 56 , 176 . virtual particles do not necessarily carry the same mass as the corresponding real particle , although they always conserve energy and momentum . the closer its characteristics come to those of ordinary particles , the longer the virtual particle exists . they are important in the physics of many processes , including particle scattering and casimir forces . in quantum field theory , forces—such as the electromagnetic repulsion or attraction between two charges—can be thought of as due to the exchange of virtual photons between the charges . virtual photons are the exchange particle for the electromagnetism . the term is somewhat loose and vaguely defined , in that it refers to the view that the world is made up of '' real particles '' . it is not . '' real particles '' are better understood to be excitations of the underlying quantum fields . virtual particles are also excitations of the underlying fields , but are '' temporary '' in the sense that they appear in calculations of interactions , but never as asymptotic states or indices to the scattering matrix . the accuracy and use of virtual particles in calculations is firmly established , but as they can not be detected in experiments , deciding how to precisely describe them is a topic of debate .