tikhvin cemetery is a historic cemetery in the centre of saint petersburg . it is part of the alexander nevsky lavra , and is one of four cemeteries in the complex . since 1932 it has been part of the , which refers to it as the necropolis of the masters of art . opened in 1823 after the monastery 's first cemetery , the lazarevskoe , had become overcrowded , the cemetery was initially called the '' new lazarevsky '' . it acquired its name after the building of its cemetery church , consecrated to the icon of the theotokos of tikhvin . it soon superseded the lazarevskoe cemetery and became a popular and prestigious burial ground . the first literary figure , nikolay karamzin , was buried in the cemetery in 1826 , followed in 1833 by nikolay gnedich , an associate of alexander pushkin 's . several other friends of pushkin were later buried in the cemetery . particularly significant interments were those of mikhail glinka in 1857 , fyodor dostoevsky in 1881 , modest mussorgsky and alexander borodin in the 1880s , and pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky in 1891 . during the soviet period the cemetery was earmarked for development into a museum necropolis , envisaged primarily as a landscaped park , with strategically placed memorials to important figures of russian history . with several notable artists having already been buried in the cemetery , it was decided to designate it as the '' necropolis of the masters of art '' . during the 1930s many important russian composers , painters , sculptors , writers and poets were exhumed from their original resting places across the city , and brought , with or without their monuments , to be reburied in the tikhvin cemetery . at the same time the monuments of those figures deemed not in keeping with the artistic theme of the cemetery were removed or destroyed . several more burials of particularly important artists took place during the soviet period , as the cemetery established a role as a kind of national pantheon . today the cemetery operates as a museum necropolis under the auspices of the .