great zimbabwe is an ancient city in the south-eastern hills of zimbabwe near lake mutirikwe and the town of masvingo . it is thought to have been the capital of a great kingdom , although which kingdom is not certain , during the country 's late iron age . construction on the city began in the 11th century and continued until it was abandoned in the 15th century . the edifices are believed to have been erected by the ancestral shona . the stone city spans an area of which , at its peak , could have housed up to 18,000 people . it is recognised as a world heritage site by unesco . great zimbabwe is believed to have served as a royal palace for the local monarch . as such , it would have been used as the seat of political power . among the edifice 's most prominent features were its walls , some of which are eleven metres high . they were constructed without mortar ( dry stone ) . eventually , the city was abandoned and fell into ruin . the earliest known written mention of the great zimbabwe ruins was in 1531 by vicente pegado , captain of the portuguese garrison of sofala , on the coast of modern-day mozambique , who recorded it as symbaoe . the first confirmed visits by europeans were in the late 19th century , with investigations of the site starting in 1871 . later , studies of the monument were controversial in the archaeology world , with political pressure being put upon archaeologists by the government of rhodesia to deny its construction by native african people . great zimbabwe has since been adopted as a national monument by the zimbabwean government , and the modern independent state was named after it . the word great distinguishes the site from the many hundreds of small ruins , now known as '' zimbabwes '' , spread across the zimbabwe highveld . m . sibanda , h . moyana et al . 1992 . the african heritage . history for junior secondary schools . book 1 . zimbabwe publishing house . there are 200 such sites in southern africa , such as bumbusi in zimbabwe and manyikeni in mozambique , with monumental , mortarless walls ; great zimbabwe is the largest of these .