large numbers of ethnic germans from russia have emigrated to north america . migration to canada or the united states by russian germans ( german : deutsche aus russland or russlanddeutsche ; russian : русские немцы , russkiye nemtsy ) peaked in the late 19th century . the upper great plains of the united states and southern manitoba , alberta and saskatchewan in canada have large areas populated primarily by descendants of germans from russia . their mother tongues were high german or low german dialects , despite ethnic german communities having existed in russia for many generations . russian germans frequently lived in distinct communities , where they maintained german-language schools and german churches . they were primarily volga germans from the lower volga river valley , black sea germans from the crimea/black sea region , or volhynian germans from the governorate of volhynia in contemporary ukraine . the smaller villages were often settled by colonists of a common religious denomination , who had come from the same area , so one town might be made up of german-speaking catholics , lutherans or german jews , for instance ; the people often settled together from the same region of germany and thus spoke the same german dialect . also included were germans of the mennonite faiths ( today mostly referred to as russian mennonite despite of their german language culture and ethnicity ) , and also hutterites seeking religious freedom . originally recruited and welcomed into russia in the 18th century , when they were promised the practice of their own language and religions , and exemption from military service , the german people found increasing hardship . with changes in russian politics , the government took back some of the privileges granted ; economic conditions grew poor , and there were a series of famines . these conditions led to german mass migrations from russia . after the 1917 revolution and the rise of the soviet union , and particularly under the leadership of joseph stalin , conditions for the remaining germans in russia declined considerably . the rise of nazi germany , with its concern about ethnic germans in other lands and proselytizing the german volk , led to suspicions of any german within russia . in 1932-33 , the soviet authorities forced starvation among the volga germans ( according to western observers ) , seized their food claiming famine in the rest of the soviet union and ordered the breakup of many german villages . koch , fred c . ( 1977 ) . the volga germans : in russia and the americas , from 1763 to the present , pp . 281-82 . the pennsylvania state university . after the nazi invasion of the soviet union , stalin ordered the deportation of russian germans to labor camps in siberia and central asia , as he was suspicious of potential collaboration with the germans . rappaport , helen ( 1999 ) . joseph stalin : a biographical companion , p . 191 . abc-clio , inc . in some areas , his forces attempted to bulldoze the german churches , and reused their tombstones for paving blocks . many germans in the americas sent donations back to their communities , but others permanently lost contact with their relatives during the social disruption of the famine and stalin 's great purge , followed by world war ii .