image : go rin no sho.gif thumb 295px right go rin no sho calligraphy in kanji . musashi strove for as great a mastery in japanese calligraphy as in swordsmanship . is a text on kenjutsu and the martial arts in general , written by the japanese swordsman miyamoto musashi around 1643 . there have been various translations made over the years , and it enjoys an audience considerably broader than only that of martial artists and people across east asia : for instance , some foreign business leaders find its discussion of conflict and taking the advantage to be relevant to their work in a business context . the modern-day hyoho niten ichi-ryu employs it as a manual of technique and philosophy . musashi establishes a '' no-nonsense '' theme throughout the text . for instance , he repeatedly remarks that technical flourishes are excessive , and contrasts worrying about such things with the principle that all technique is simply a method of cutting down one 's opponent . he also continually makes the point that the understandings expressed in the book are important for combat on any scale , whether a one-on-one duel or a massive battle . descriptions of principles are often followed by admonitions to '' investigate this thoroughly '' through practice rather than trying to learn them by merely reading . image : musashi ts pic.jpg thumb right miyamoto musashi in his prime , wielding two bokken . musashi describes and advocates a two-sword fencing style ( nitōjutsu ) : that is , wielding both katana and wakizashi , contrary to the more traditional method of wielding the katana two-handed . however , he only explicitly describes wielding two swords in a section on fighting against many adversaries . the stories of his many duels rarely refer to musashi himself wielding two swords , although , since they are mostly oral traditions , their details may be inaccurate . musashi states within the volume that one should train with a long sword in each hand , thereby training the body and improving one 's ability to use two blades simultaneously .