extortion is the practice of obtaining benefit through coercion . in most jurisdictions it is likely to constitute a crime ; the bulk of this article deals with such cases . robbery is the simplest and most common form of extortion . extortion is sometimes called the '' protection racket '' because the racketeers often phrase their demands as payment for '' protection '' from ( real or hypothetical ) threats from unspecified other parties ; though often , and almost always , such '' protection '' is simply abstinence of harm from the same party , and such is implied in the '' protection '' offer . extortion is commonly practiced by organized crime . in some jurisdictions , actually obtaining the benefit is not required to commit the offense , and making a threat of violence which refers to a requirement of a payment of money or property to halt future violence is sufficient to commit the offense . exaction refers not only to extortion or the demanding and obtaining of something through force , but additionally , in its formal definition , means the infliction of something such as pain and suffering or making somebody endure something unpleasant . the term extortion is often used metaphorically to refer to usury or to price gouging , though neither is legally considered extortion . it is also often used loosely to refer to everyday situations where one person feels indebted against their will , to another , in order to receive an essential service or avoid legal consequences . neither extortion nor blackmail requires a threat of a criminal act , such as violence , merely a threat used to elicit actions , money , or property from the object of the extortion . such threats include the filing of reports ( true or not ) of criminal behavior to the police , revelation of damaging facts ( such as pictures of the object of the extortion in a compromising position ) , etc . in law extortion can refer to political corruption , such as bribery or influence peddling , but in general vocabulary the word usually first brings to mind blackmail or protection rackets . the logical connection between the corruption sense of the word and the other senses is that to demand bribes in one 's official capacity is blackmail or racketeering in essence ( that is , '' you need access to this resource , the government restricts access to it through my office , and i will charge you unfairly and unlawfully for such access '' ) . extortion is also known as shakedown , and occasionally exaction .