the tobacco market had declined , and many planters in northern virginia converted to mixed crops . like them , by 1766 washington had ceased growing tobacco at mount vernon and had replaced the crop with wheat , corn , and other grains . besides hemp and flax , he experimented with 60 other crops including cotton and silk . he also derived income from a gristmill which produced cornmeal and flour for export and also ground neighbors ' grain for fees . washington similarly sold the services of the estate 's looms and blacksmith . he built and operated a small fishing fleet , permitting mount vernon to export fish . washington practiced the selective breeding of sheep in an effort to produce better quality wool . washington was not as invested in animal husbandry as he was in cropping experiments , which were elaborate and included complex field rotations , nitrogen fixing crops and a range of soil amendments . the washington household consumed a wider range of protein sources than was typical for the chesapeake population of his day , which consumed a great deal of beef . the new crops were less labor-intensive than tobacco ; hence , the estate had a surplus of slaves . but washington refused to break up families for sale . washington began to hire skilled indentured servants from europe to train the redundant slaves for service on and off the estate . following his service in the war , washington returned to mount vernon and in 1785–1786 spent a great deal of effort improving the landscaping of the estate . it is estimated that during his two terms as president of the united states ( 1789–1797 ) , washington spent a total of 434 days in residence at mount vernon . after his presidency , washington tended to repairs to the buildings , socializing , and further gardening . in his will , written several months before his death in december 1799 , washington left directions for the emancipation of all the slaves who belonged to him . of the 317 slaves at mount vernon in 1799 , a little less than half , 123 individuals , belonged to george washington and were set free under the terms of his will . when martha washington 's first husband , daniel parke custis , died without a will , she received a life interest in one-third of his estate , including the slaves . neither george nor martha washington could free these slaves by law . upon her death , they reverted to the custis estate and were divided among her grandchildren . by 1799 , 153 slaves at mount vernon were part of this dower property . in accordance with state law , george washington stipulated in his will that elderly slaves or those who were too sick to work were to be supported throughout their lives by his estate . children without parents , or those whose families were too poor or indifferent to see to their education , were to be bound out ( or apprenticed ) to masters and mistresses who would teach them reading , writing , and a useful trade , until they were ultimately freed at the age of twenty-five . in december 1800 , martha washington signed a deed of manumission for her deceased husband 's slaves , a transaction which is recorded in the abstracts of the fairfax county , virginia , court records . the slaves finally received their freedom on 1 january 1801 .