salmon portland chase ( january 13 , 1808may 7 , 1873 ) was a u.s . politician and jurist who served as the sixth & nbsp ; chief justice of the united states . he also served as the 23rd governor of ohio , represented ohio in the united states senate , and served as the 25th united states secretary of the treasury . chase was therefore one of a few u.s . politicians who served in all three branches of the federal government . born in cornish , new hampshire , chase studied law under attorney general william wirt before establishing a legal practice in cincinnati . he became an anti-slavery activist and frequently defended fugitive slaves in court . chase left the whig party in 1841 to become the leader of ohio 's liberty party . in 1848 , he helped establish the free soil party and recruited former president martin van buren to serve as the party 's presidential nominee . chase won election to the senate the following year , and he opposed the compromise of 1850 and the kansas–nebraska act . in the aftermath of the kansas–nebraska act , chase helped establish the republican party , which opposed the extension of slavery into the territories . after leaving the senate , chase served as the governor of ohio from 1856 to 1860 . chase sought the republican nomination for president in the 1860 presidential election , but the party chose abraham lincoln at its national convention . after lincoln won the election , he asked chase to serve as secretary of the treasury . chase served in that position from 1861 to 1864 , working hard to ensure the union was well-financed during the civil war . chase resigned from the cabinet in june 1864 , but retained support among the radical republicans . partly to appease the radical republicans , lincoln nominated chase to fill the supreme court vacancy that arose following chief justice roger taney 's death . chase served as chief justice from 1864 to his death in 1873 . he presided over the senate trial of president andrew johnson during the impeachment proceedings of 1868 . despite his nomination to the court , chase continued to pursue the presidency . he unsuccessfully sought the democratic presidential nomination in 1868 and the liberal republican nomination in 1872 .