ley lines refer to straight alignments drawn between various historic structures and prominent landmarks . the idea was developed in early 20th-century europe , with ley line believers arguing that these alignments were recognised by ancient societies that deliberately erected structures along them . since the 1960s , members of the earth mysteries movement and other esoteric traditions have commonly believed that such ley lines demarcate '' earth energies '' and serve as guides for alien spacecraft . archaeologists and scientists regard ley lines as an example of pseudo-archaeology and pseudo-science . the idea of '' leys '' as straight tracks across the landscape was put forward by the english antiquary alfred watkins in the 1920s , particularly in his book the old straight track . he argued that straight lines could be drawn between various historic structures and that these represented trade routes created by ancient british societies . although he gained a small following , watkins ' ideas were never accepted by the british archaeological establishment , a fact that frustrated him . his critics noted that his ideas relied on drawing lines between sites established at different periods of the past . they also argued that in prehistory , as in the present , it was impractical to travel in a straight line across hilly or mountainous areas of britain , rendering his leys unlikely as trade routes . independently of watkins ' ideas , a similar notion—that of heilige linien ( 'holy lines ' ) —was raised in 1920s germany . during the 1960s , watkins ' ideas were revived in altered form by british proponents of the countercultural earth mysteries movement . in 1961 , tony wedd put forward the belief that leys were established by prehistoric communities to guide alien spacecraft . this view was promoted to a wider audience in the books of john michell , particularly his 1969 work the view over atlantis . michell 's publications were accompanied by the launch of the ley hunter magazine and the appearance of a ley hunter community keen to identify ley lines across the british landscape . ley hunters often combined their search for ley lines with other esoteric practices like dowsing and numerology and with a belief in a forthcoming age of aquarius that would transform human society . although often hostile to archaeologists , some ley hunters attempted to ascertain scientific evidence for their belief in earth energies at prehistoric sites , evidence they could not obtain . following sustained archaeological criticism , the ley hunter community dissipated in the 1990s , with several of its key proponents abandoning the idea and moving into the study of landscape archaeology and folkloristics . belief in ley lines nevertheless remains common among some esoteric religious groups , such as forms of modern paganism , in both europe and north america . archaeologists note that there is no evidence that ley lines were a recognised phenomenon among ancient european societies and that attempts to draw them typically rely on linking together structures that were built in different historical periods . archaeologists and statisticians have demonstrated that a random distribution of a sufficient number of points on a plane will inevitably create alignments of random points purely by chance . skeptics have also stressed that the esoteric idea of earth energies running through ley lines has not been scientifically verified , remaining an article of faith for its believers .