the great game '' was a political and diplomatic confrontation that existed for most of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th century between the british empire and the russian empire , over afghanistan and neighbouring territories in central and south asia . it also had direct consequences in persia and british india . britain was fearful of russia invading india to add to the vast empire that russia was building . as a result , there was a deep atmosphere of distrust and the talk of war between the two major colonial empire . britain made it a high priority to protect all the approaches to india , and the '' great game '' is primarily how the british did this . some historians have concluded that russia had no plans involving india , as the russians repeatedly stated to the british . barbara jelavich , st . petersburg and moscow : tsarist and soviet foreign policy , 1814–1974 ( 1974 ) p 200 the great game began on 12 january 1830 when lord ellenborough , the president of the board of control for india , tasked lord william bentinck , the governor-general , with establishing a new trade route to the emirate of bukhara . britain intended to gain control over the emirate of afghanistan and make it a protectorate , and to use the ottoman empire , the qajar dynasty , the khanate of khiva , and the emirate of bukhara as buffer states between both empires . this would protect india and also key british sea trade routes by stopping russia from gaining a port on the persian gulf or the indian ocean . russia proposed afghanistan as the neutral zone . the results included the failed first anglo-afghan war of 1838 , the first anglo-sikh war of 1845 , the second anglo-sikh war of 1848 , the second anglo-afghan war of 1878 , and the annexation of kokand by russia . historians consider the end of the great game to be the 10 september 1895 signing of the pamir boundary commission protocols , when the border between afghanistan and the russian empire was defined . the 1901 novel kim by rudyard kipling made the term popular and introduced the new implication of great power rivalry . it became even more popular after the 1979 advent of the soviet–afghan war . seymour becker , '' the ‘ great game ’ : the history of an evocative phrase . '' asian affairs 43.1 ( 2012 ) : 61-80 .