in mathematics and computing , a root-finding algorithm is an algorithm for finding zeroes , also called '' roots '' , of continuous functions . a zero of a function , from the real numbers to real numbers or from the complex numbers to the complex numbers , is a number such that . as , generally , the zeroes of a function can not be computed exactly nor expressed in closed form , root-finding algorithms provide approximations to zeroes , expressed either as floating point numbers or as small isolating intervals , or disks for complex roots ( an interval or disk output being equivalent to an approximate output together with an error bound ) . equation solving is the same as finding the roots of the function . thus root-finding algorithms allow solving any equation defined by continuous functions . however , most root-finding algorithms do not guarantee that they will find all the roots ; in particular , if such an algorithm does not find any root , that does not mean that no root exists . most numerical root-finding methods use iteration , producing a sequence of numbers that hopefully converge towards the root as a limit . they require one or more initial guesses of the root as starting values , then each iteration of the algorithm produces a successively more accurate approximation to the root . since the iteration must be stopped at some point these methods produce an approximation to the root , not an exact solution . many methods compute subsequent values by evaluating an auxiliary function on the preceding values . the limit is thus a fixed point of the auxiliary function , which is chosen for having the roots of the original equation as fixed points , and for converging rapidly to these fixed points . the behaviour of general root-finding algorithms is studied in numerical analysis . however , for polynomials , root-finding study belongs generally to computer algebra , since algebraic properties of polynomials are fundamental for the most efficient algorithms . the efficiency of an algorithm may depend dramatically on the characteristics of the given functions . for example , many algorithms use the derivative of the input function , while others work on every continuous function . in general , numerical algorithms are not guaranteed to find all the roots of a function , so failing to find a root does not prove that there is no root . however , for polynomials , there are specific algorithms that use algebraic properties for certifying that no root is missed , and locating the roots in separate intervals ( or disks for complex roots ) that are small enough to ensure the convergence of numerical methods ( typically newton 's method ) to the unique root so located .