sir edward coke '' cook '' , formerly ; 1 february 1552 – 3 september 1634 ) was an english barrister , judge , and politician who is considered to be the greatest jurist of the elizabethan and jacobean eras . born into an upper-class family , coke was educated at trinity college , cambridge , before leaving to study at the inner temple , where he was called to the bar on 20 april 1578 . as a barrister he took part in several notable cases , including slade 's case , before earning enough political favour to be elected to parliament , where he served first as solicitor general and then as speaker of the house of commons . following a promotion to attorney general he led the prosecution in several notable cases , including those against robert devereux , walter raleigh , and the gunpowder plot conspirators . as a reward for his services he was first knighted and then made chief justice of the common pleas . as chief justice , coke restricted the use of the ex officio ( star chamber ) oath and , in the case of proclamations and dr . bonham 's case , declared the king to be subject to the law , and the laws of parliament to be void if in violation of '' common right and reason '' . these actions eventually led to his transfer to the chief justice of the king 's bench , where it was felt he could do less damage . coke then successively restricted the definition of treason and declared a royal letter illegal , leading to his dismissal from the bench on 14 november 1616 . with no chance of regaining his judicial posts , he instead returned to parliament , where he swiftly became a leading member of the opposition . during his time as a member of parliament he wrote and campaigned for the statute of monopolies , which substantially restricted the ability of the monarch to grant patents , and authored and was instrumental in the passage of the petition of right , a document considered one of the three crucial constitutional documents of england , along with magna carta and the bill of rights 1689 . coke is best known in modern times for his institutes , described by john rutledge as '' almost the foundations of our law '' , and his reports , which have been called '' perhaps the single most influential series of named reports '' . historically , he was a highly influential judge ; within england and wales , his statements and works were used to justify the right to silence , while the statute of monopolies is considered to be one of the first actions in the conflict between parliament and monarch that led to the english civil war . in america , coke 's decision in dr . bonham 's case was used to justify the voiding of both the stamp act 1765 and writs of assistance , which led to the american war of independence ; after the establishment of the united states his decisions and writings profoundly influenced the third and fourth amendments to the united states constitution while necessitating the sixteenth .