in the 2007 transformers ( film ) , megatron 's alternate mode is a cybertronian jet . the apparent explanation for the departure from his gun form is that director michael bay does not want to include any sort of size changing in the transformations , which the writers described as '' cheating '' . ( this significant change in size is known in transformers fan communities as '' mass shifting '' and '' mass displacement '' . ) in one of the special features on the dvd , g1 megatron 's transformation was likened to darth vader turning into his own lightsaber to be wielded by another person . additionally , bay states in the dvd that megatron 's face was originally different from the one shown in the film , but he asked it to be redesigned due to fans reacting with strong opposition to it once megatron 's design was unveiled before the film was completed . in the second film , megatron gains an alternate mode , that of a cybertronian flying tank . in the third film , megatron receives another alternate mode , that being a mack 10-wheeler tanker truck ( a demented version of optimus prime 's alternate mode ) with a tarp which may act as a cowl to partially hide megatron 's face due to extensive damage he received in the second film . after his death in the third film , he returns in the fourth movie , where his consciousness possesses galvatron , a man-made transformer created by ksi , and transforms into a 2014 freightliner argosy cab over truck . actor hugo weaving provides the voice of megatron in the first three films . his voice in the series seems to have been modulated to give it a deeper , growling tone as well as the other voice actors . the original voice of megatron , frank welker , provides his voice for the 2007 and 2009 video games , the exclusive animated prequel and the last knight . transformers : original megatron , prime actors to voice tf game like all characters in the film , megatron was redesigned for purposes of realism and focus on the alien aspect of the transformer race . however , he still retains some minor aspects of his generation 1 design . as shown in the first film , he can transform his right hand into his iconic fusion cannon , and can also transform his right arm into a steel flail . in the second film , after megatron 's resurrection , his right arm could transform into a fusion cannon , coupled with a lobster claw-like blade/crushing device . in the third film , instead of using a fusion cannon integrated into either of his arms , he uses a handheld version of it , which resembles a human shotgun , specifically a lupara . in the fifth film , megatron once again uses a fusion cannon integrated into his right arm as well as utilizing a handheld sword resembling a congolese short sword . according to an early interview with michael bay , megatron stands at tall , but according to his profile in the second issue of the transformers uk comic megatron stands '' tall '' and weighs 8.6 tons . additionally , the magazine and the movie guide states he is powered by a self-regenerating dark matter power core . hasbro has now said that megatron officially stands 35 feet and weighs in at 5.7 metric tons . botcon malaysia 2007 featured a parking space which was '' reserved for megatron '' . a car parked in the space had been totaled , presumably by the decepticon leader for taking his spot .