watercolor ( american english ) or watercolour ( british english ; see spelling differences ) , also aquarelle ( french , from italian diminutive of latin aqua '' water '' ) , '' aquarelle , n . '' . oed online . march 2020 . oxford university press . is a painting method in which the paints are made of pigments suspended in a water-based solution . watercolor refers to both the medium and the resulting artwork . aquarelles painted with water-soluble colored ink instead of modern water colors are called '' aquarellum atramento '' ( latin for '' aquarelle made with ink '' ) by experts . however , this term has been more and more passing out of use . roger ling ( 1991 ) : roman painting . cambridge university press . ellis kirkham waterhouse ( 1994 ) : painting in britain - 1530 to 1790 . yale university press . the traditional and most common support—material to which the paint is applied—for watercolor paintings is watercolor paper . other supports include papyrus , bark papers , plastics , vellum , leather , fabric , wood and watercolor canvas ( coated with a gesso that is specially formulated for use with watercolours ) . watercolor paper is often made entirely or partially with cotton . this gives the surface the appropriate texture and minimizes distortion when wet . watercolor papers are usually cold pressed papers , and gives better texture and look with gsm between 200 and 300 . watercolors are usually translucent , and appear luminous because the pigments are laid down in a pure form with few fillers obscuring the pigment colors . watercolors can also be made opaque by adding chinese white . watercolour paint is an ancient form of painting . in east asia , watercolor painting with inks is referred to as brush painting or scroll painting . in chinese , korean and japanese painting it has been the dominant medium , often in monochrome black or browns , often using inkstick or other pigments . india , ethiopia and other countries have long watercolor painting traditions as well . american artists in the early 19th century seemed to regard watercolor primarily as a sketching tool in preparation for the '' finished '' work in oil or engraving .