pietism is a movement within lutheranism that combines its emphasis on biblical doctrine with the reformed emphasis on individual piety and living a vigorous christian life . although the movement initially was active exclusively within lutheranism , it had a tremendous impact on protestantism worldwide , particularly in north america and europe . pietism originated in modern germany in the late 17th century with the work of philipp spener , a lutheran theologian whose emphasis on personal transformation through spiritual rebirth and renewal , individual devotion , and piety laid the foundations for the movement . although spener did not directly advocate the quietistic , legalistic , and semi-separatist practices of pietism , they were more or less involved in the positions he assumed or the practices which he encouraged . pietism spread from germany to switzerland and the rest of german-speaking europe , to scandinavia and the baltics ( where it was heavily influential , leaving a permanent mark on the region 's dominant lutheranism , with figures like hans nielsen hauge in norway , peter spaak and carl olof rosenius in sweden , katarina asplund in finland , and barbara von krüdener in the baltics ) , and to the rest of europe . it was further taken to north america , primarily by german and scandinavian immigrants . there , it influenced protestants of other ethnic backgrounds , contributing to the 18th-century foundation of evangelicalism , a movement within protestantism that today has some 300 million followers . in the middle of the 19th century , lars levi laestadius spearheaded a pietist revival in scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as laestadian lutheranism , which is adhered to today by the laestadian lutheran church as well as by several congregations within other mainstream lutheran churches , such as the evangelical lutheran church of finland . the eielsen synod and association of free lutheran congregations are pietist lutheran bodies that emerged in the haugean movement , which was spearheaded by hans nielsen hauge . in 1900 , the church of the lutheran brethren was founded and it adheres to pietist lutheran theology , emphasizing a born again . whereas pietistic lutherans stayed within the lutheran tradition , adherents of a related movement known as radical pietism believed in separating from the established lutheran churches . some of the theological tenets of pietism also influenced other traditions of protestantism , inspiring the anglican priest john wesley to begin the methodism movement and alexander mack to begin the anabaptism brethren movement .