a monarchical system of government existed in ireland from ancient times until—for what became the republic of ireland—the early twentieth century . northern ireland , as part of the united kingdom , remains under a monarchical system of government . the gaelic kingdoms of ireland ended with the norman invasion of ireland ( 1169–1171 ) , when the kingdom became a fief of the holy see under the lordship of the king of england . this lasted until the parliament of ireland conferred the crown of ireland upon king henry viii of england during the english reformation . the monarch of england held the crowns of england and ireland in a personal union . the union of the crowns in 1603 expanded the personal union to include scotland . the personal union between england and scotland became a political union with the enactments of the acts of union 1707 , which created the kingdom of great britain . the crowns of great britain and ireland remained in personal union until it was ended by the acts of union 1800 , which united ireland and great britain into the united kingdom of great britain and ireland from january 1801 until december 1922 . after that date , most of ireland left the united kingdom to become the largely independent irish free state , a dominion within the british empire ; the remaining part , northern ireland , remained within the united kingdom . both the free state and the united kingdom , which changed its name to the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland in 1927 , had the same person as monarch : george v . in 1937 , the year after george v 's death , the free state adopted a new constitution which changed the state 's name to '' ireland '' ( or éire in irish ) and removed all mention of the monarch . in april 1949 , ireland was declared a republic , with the description of the '' republic of ireland '' , and it left the commonwealth of nations . since april 1949 , the only part of the island of ireland that has retained a monarchical system is northern ireland ( as part of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland ) .