image : revolution flag of egypt 1919.svg thumb right green flag with a white crescent and a white cross flown during the egyptian revolution of 1919 to symbolize the common struggle of islam in egypt and copt against the british occupation . christianity and islam are the two largest religions in the world and share a historical traditional connection , with some major theological differences . the two faiths share a common place of origin in the middle east , and consider themselves to be monotheism . christianity is an abrahamic , monotheistic religion which developed out of second temple judaism in the 1st century ce . it is founded on the life , teachings , death , and resurrection of jesus christ , and those who follow it are called christians . islam is an abrahamic , monotheistic religion that developed in the 7th century ce . islam , which literally means '' submission to god '' , was founded on the teachings of muhammad as an expression of ibadah of god . those who follow it are called muslims which means '' submitter to god '' . muslims have a range of views on christianity , from viewing christians to be people of the book to regarding them as kafirs ( infidels ) that commit shirk ( polytheism ) because of trinitarianism and as dhimmis ( religious taxpayers ) under sharia . christian views on islam are diverse and range from considering islam a fellow abrahamic religion worshipping the same god , to believing islam to be heresy or an apostasy cult that denies the crucifixion and rejects the jesus in islam . islam considers jesus to be al-masih , the arabic term for messiah , sent to guide the israelites ( ban카 isr훮'카l in arabic ) with a new revelation : al-inj카l ( arabic for '' the gospel '' ) . the oxford dictionary of islam , p.158 christianity believes jesus to be the messiah of the hebrew scripture , the son of god , and god the son , while muslims consider the trinity to be a division of tawhid and a grave sin ( shirk ) . muslims believe jesus ( isa ) to be a messenger of god , not the son of god . christianity and islam have different scriptures , with christianity using the bible and islam using the quran , though muslims believe that both the quran and the gospel , termed injeel , were sent by god . both texts offer an account of the life and works of jesus . the belief in jesus is a fundamental part of islamic theology , and muslims view the injeel as tahrif ( distorted or altered ) , while christians consider their gospels to be authoritative and the quran to be a later , fabricated or apocryphal work . both religions believe in the virgin birth of jesus through mary , but the biblical and islamic accounts differ .