the kingdom of ireland ( classical irish : ; modern irish : was a client state of england and then of great britain that existed from 1542 until 1800 in the island of ireland . it was ruled by the monarchs of england and then of great britain in personal union with their other realms . the kingdom was dublin castle administration by a viceroy ( the lord deputy , later lord lieutenant ) appointed by the king or queen . ireland had its own legislature , peerage , army , legal system , and its state church . the territory of the kingdom had formerly been a lordship ruled by the kings of england , founded in 1177 by king henry ii after the anglo-norman invasion of ireland . by the 16th century , the area of english rule had shrunk greatly , and most of ireland was held by gaelic irish chiefdoms . in 1542 , king henry viii of england was made king of ireland . the english began tudor conquest of ireland , which sparked the desmond rebellions and the nine years ' war . it was completed in the 17th century . the conquest involved confiscating land from the native irish and plantations of ireland . in its early years , the kingdom had limited recognition , as no catholic countries in europe recognised henry viii and his successor , edward vi , as kings of ireland . catholic mary i was recognised as queen of ireland by pope paul iv . catholics , who made up most of the population , were officially discriminated against in the kingdom , which from the late 17th century was dominated by a protestant ascendancy . this discrimination was one of the main drivers behind several conflicts which broke out : the irish confederate wars ( 1641–53 ) , the williamite-jacobite war ( 1689–91 ) , the armagh disturbances ( 1780s–90s ) and the irish rebellion of 1798 . the parliament of ireland passed the acts of union 1800 by which it abolished itself and the kingdom . the act was also passed by the parliament of great britain . it established the united kingdom of great britain and ireland on the first day of 1801 by uniting the parliaments of ireland and of great britain .