giambattista vico ( born giovan battista vico ; ; 23 june 1668 – 23 january 1744 ) was an italian political philosopher and rhetorician , historian and jurist of the age of enlightenment . he criticized the expansion and development of modern rationalism , was an apologist for classical antiquity , finding cartesian analysis and other types of reductionism impractical to daily life , and was the first expositor of the fundamentals of social science and of semiotics . the latin aphorism verum esse ipsum factum ( '' what is true is precisely what is made '' ) coined by vico is an early instance of constructivist epistemology . ernst von glasersfeld , an introduction to radical constructivism . bizzell and herzberg , the rhetorical tradition , p . 800 . he inaugurated the modern field of the philosophy of history , and , although the term philosophy of history is not in his writings , vico spoke of a '' history of philosophy narrated philosophically . '' the contemporary interpretation of vico is by verene , donald philip . see : '' giambattista vico '' ( 2002 ) , a companion to early modern philosophy , steven m . nadler , ed . london : blackwell publishing , , p . 570 . although he was not an historicism , contemporary interest in vico usually has been motivated by historicists , such as isaiah berlin , a philosopher and historian of ideas , vico and herder : two studies in the history of ideas edward said , a literary critic , and hayden white , a metahistorian . giambattista vico ( 1976 ) , '' the topics of history : the deep structure of the new science '' , in giorgio tagliacozzo and donald philip verene , eds , science of humanity , baltimore and london : 1976 . giambattista vico : an international symposium . giorgio tagliacozzo and hayden v . white , eds . johns hopkins university press : 1969 . attempts to inaugurate a non-historicist interpretation of vico are in interpretation : a journal of political philosophy spring 2009 , vol . 36.2 , and spring 2010 37.3 ; and in historia philosophica , vol . 11 , 2013 vico 's intellectual masterpiece is the book scienza nuova ( 1725 , new science ) , which attempts a systematic organization of the humanities as a single science that recorded and explained the historical cycles by which societies rise and fall . the penguin encyclopedia ( 2006 ) , david crystal , ed . , p . 1,409 .