post-translational modification ( ptm ) refers to the covalent and generally enzyme modification of proteins following protein biosynthesis . proteins are synthesized by ribosomes translating mrna into polypeptide chains , which may then undergo ptm to form the mature protein product . ptms are important components in cell signaling , as for example when prohormones are converted to hormones . post-translational modifications can occur on the amino acid side chains or at the protein 's c- or n- termini . they can extend the chemical repertoire of the 20 standard amino acids by modifying an existing functional group or introducing a new one such as phosphate . phosphorylation is a very common mechanism for regulating the activity of enzymes and is the most common post-translational modification . many eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins also have carbohydrate molecules attached to them in a process called glycosylation , which can promote protein folding and improve stability as well as serving regulatory functions . attachment of lipid molecules , known as lipidation , often targets a protein or part of a protein attached to the cell membrane . other forms of post-translational modification consist of cleaving peptide bonds , as in processing a propeptide to a mature form or removing the initiator methionine residue . the formation of disulfide bonds from cysteine residues may also be referred to as a post-translational modification . for instance , the peptide hormone insulin is cut twice after disulfide bonds are formed , and a propeptide is removed from the middle of the chain ; the resulting protein consists of two polypeptide chains connected by disulfide bonds . some types of post-translational modification are consequences of oxidative stress . carbonylation is one example that targets the modified protein for degradation and can result in the formation of protein aggregates . specific amino acid modifications can be used as biomarkers indicating oxidative damage . sites that often undergo post-translational modification are those that have a functional group that can serve as a nucleophile in the reaction : the hydroxyl groups of serine , threonine , and tyrosine ; the amine forms of lysine , arginine , and histidine ; the thiolate anion of cysteine ; the carboxylates of aspartate and glutamate ; and the n- and c-termini . in addition , although the amide of asparagine is a weak nucleophile , it can serve as an attachment point for glycans . rarer modifications can occur at oxidized methionines and at some methylenes in side chains . post-translational modification of proteins can be experimentally detected by a variety of techniques , including mass spectrometry , eastern blotting , and western blotting . additional methods are provided in the external links sections .