retail is the process of selling consumer goods or services to customers through multiple distribution channel to earn a profit . retailers satisfy demand identified through a supply chain . the term '' retailer '' is typically applied where a service provider fills the small orders of many individuals , who are end-users , rather than large orders of a small number of wholesale , corporate or government clientele . shopping generally refers to the act of trade products . sometimes this is done to obtain final goods , including necessities such as food and clothing ; sometimes it takes place as a recreational activity . recreational shopping often involves window shopping and browsing : it does not always result in a purchase . retail markets and shops have a very ancient history , dating back to antiquity . some of the earliest retailers were itinerant peddlers . over the centuries , retail shops were transformed from little more than '' rude booths '' to the sophisticated shopping malls of the modern era . most modern retailers typically make a variety of strategic level decisions including the type of store , the market to be served , the optimal product assortment , customer service , supporting services and the store 's overall market positioning . once the strategic retail plan is in place , retailers devise the retail mix which includes product , price , place , promotion , personnel , and presentation . in the digital age , an increasing number of retailers are seeking to reach broader markets by selling through multiple channels , including both bricks and mortar and online shopping . digital technologies are also changing the way that consumers pay for goods and services . retailing support services may also include the provision of credit , delivery services , advisory services , stylist services and a range of other supporting services . retail shops occur in a diverse range of types and in many different contexts & nbsp ; – from strip mall in residential area through to large , indoor shopping malls . shopping streets may restrict traffic to pedestrians only . sometimes a shopping street has a partial or full roof to create a more comfortable shopping environment – protecting customers from various types of weather conditions such as extreme temperatures , winds or precipitation . forms of non-shop retailing include online retailing ( a type of electronic-commerce used for business-to-consumer ( b2c ) transactions ) and mail order .