upon admission into the order of canada , members are given various insignia of the organization , all designed by bruce w . beatty , who '' broke new ground in the design of insignia of orders within the queen 's realms '' and was himself made a member of the order in 1990 ; beatty attended every investiture ceremony between 1967 and early 2010 . the badge belonging to the sovereign consists of a jewelled , 18-carat gold crown of ruby , emeralds , and sapphires , from which is suspended a white , enamelled , hexagonal snowflake design , with six equal leaves and diamonds between each . at the centre is a disc bearing a maple leaf in pavé-laid rubies on a white enamel background , surrounded at its edge by a red enamel ring ( annulus ) bearing the motto of the order . the chancellor wears the badge of a companion and is , upon installation as governor general , granted a livery collar for wear at order of canada investiture ceremonies . the badges for inductees are of a similar design to the sovereign 's badge , though without precious stones , and slight differences for each grade . for companions , the emblem is gilt with a red enamel maple leaf in the central disk ; for officers , it is gilt with a gold maple leaf ; and for members , both the badge itself and the maple leaf are silver . all are topped by a st . edward 's crown , symbolizing that the order is headed by the sovereign , and the reverse is plain except for the word canada . the ribbon is white and bordered in red stripes , similar to the flag of canada ; the chest ribbon is the same for each grade , save for a metallic maple leaf in the centre , the colour of which matches that on the badge of the grade that the wearer was appointed to . for civilian wear , a lapel pin is worn on the jacket , which is designed as a miniature of the medallion . wear of the insignia is according to guidelines issued by the chancellery of honours , which stipulate that the badges be worn before most other national orders , that is , at the end of an individual 's medal bar closest to the centre of the chest or at the wearer 's neck , with only the victoria cross , the cross of valour , and the badge of the order of merit permitted to be worn before the badges of the order of canada . those in the grades of companion or officer may wear their badges on a neck ribbon , while those in the member group display their insignia suspended by a ribbon from a medal bar on the left chest . protocol originally followed the british tradition , wherein female appointees wore their order of canada emblem on a ribbon bow positioned on the left shoulder . these regulations were altered in 1997 , and women may wear their insignia in either the traditional manner or in the same fashion as the men . with the patriation in 1988 of oversight of heraldry from the uk to canada through the canadian heraldic authority , the constitution of the order of canada was amended to include the entitlement of all inductees to petition the chief herald of canada for personal armorial bearings ( coats of arms ) , should they not already possess any . companions may receive supporters , and all members may have the escutcheon ( shield ) of their arms encircled with a red ribbon bearing the order 's motto in gold , and from which is suspended a rendition of the holder 's order of canada badge . the queen , sovereign of the order of canada , approved the augmentation of her royal arms for canada with the order 's ribbon in 1987 . on the grant to bishop 's college school , québec , the sovereign 's insignia of the order was depicted below the royal arms of canada , the only time the badge has been incorporated into a grant document .