countercurrent exchange is a mechanism occurring in nature and mimicked in industry and engineering , in which there is a crossover of some property , usually heat or some chemical , between two flowing bodies flowing in opposite directions to each other . the flowing bodies can be liquids , gases , or even solid powders , or any combination of those . for example , in a distillation column , the vapors bubble up through the downward flowing liquid while exchanging both heat and mass . the maximum amount of heat or mass transfer that can be obtained is higher with countercurrent than co-current ( parallel ) exchange because countercurrent maintains a slowly declining difference or gradient ( usually temperature or concentration difference ) . in cocurrent exchange the initial gradient is higher but falls off quickly , leading to wasted potential . for example , in the adjacent diagram , the fluid being heated ( exiting top ) has a higher exiting temperature than the cooled fluid ( exiting bottom ) that was used for heating . with cocurrent or parallel exchange the heated and cooled fluids can only approach one another . the result is that countercurrent exchange can achieve a greater amount of heat or mass transfer than parallel under otherwise similar conditions . see : flow arrangement . countercurrent exchange when set up in a circuit or loop can be used for building up concentrations , heat , or other properties of flowing liquids . specifically when set up in a loop with a buffering liquid between the incoming and outgoing fluid running in a circuit , and with active transport pumps on the outgoing fluid 's tubes , the system is called a countercurrent multiplier , enabling a multiplied effect of many small pumps to gradually build up a large concentration in the buffer liquid . other countercurrent exchange circuits where the incoming and outgoing fluids touch each other are used for retaining a high concentration of a dissolved substance or for retaining heat , or for allowing the external buildup of the heat or concentration at one point in the system . countercurrent exchange circuits or loops are found extensively in nature , specifically in biology . in vertebrates , they are called a rete mirabile , originally the name of an organ in fish gills for absorbing oxygen from the water . it is mimicked in industrial systems . countercurrent exchange is a key concept in chemical engineering thermodynamics and manufacturing processes , for example in extracting sucrose from sugar beet roots . countercurrent multiplication is a similar but different concept where liquid moves in a loop followed by a long length of movement in opposite directions with an intermediate zone . the tube leading to the loop passively building up a gradient of heat ( or cooling ) or solvent concentration while the returning tube has a constant small pumping action all along it , so that a gradual intensification of the heat or concentration is created towards the loop . countercurrent multiplication has been found in the kidneys both countercurrent exchange and countercurrent multiplication systems have been found in the kidneys . the latter in the loop of henle , the first in the vasa recta as well as in many other biological organs .