puppetry is a form of theatre or performance that involves the manipulation of puppets – inanimate objects , often resembling some type of human or animal figure , that are animated or manipulated by a human called a puppeteer . such a performance is also known as a puppet production . the script for a puppet production is called a puppet play . puppeteers use movements from hands and arms to control devices such as rods or strings to move the body , head , limbs , and in some cases the mouth and eyes of the puppet . the puppeteer sometimes speaks in the voice of the character of the puppet , while at other times they perform to a recorded soundtrack . there are many different varieties of puppets , and they are made of a wide range of materials , depending on their form and intended use . they can be extremely complex or very simple in their construction . the simplest puppets are finger puppets , which are tiny puppets that fit onto a single finger , and sock puppets , which are formed from a sock and operated by inserting one 's hand inside the sock , with the opening and closing of the hand simulating the movement of the puppet 's '' mouth '' . a hand puppet or glove puppet is controlled by one hand which occupies the interior of the puppet and moves the puppet around . punch and judy puppets are familiar examples . other hand or glove puppets are larger and require two puppeteers for each puppet . japanese bunraku puppets are an example of this . marionettes are suspended and controlled by a number of strings , plus sometimes a central rod attached to a control bar held from above by the puppeteer . rod puppets are made from a head attached to a central rod . over the rod is a body form with arms attached controlled by separate rods . they have more movement possibilities as a consequence than a simple hand or glove puppet . puppetry is a very ancient form of theatre which was first recorded in the 5th century bc in ancient greece . some forms of puppetry may have originated as long ago as 3000 years bc . puppetry takes many forms , but they all share the process of animating inanimate performing objects to tell a story . puppetry occurs in almost all human societies where puppets are used for the purpose of entertainment through performance , as sacred objects in rituals , as symbolic effigy in celebrations such as carnivals , and as a catalyst for social and psychological change in transformative arts . strings , hands , shadows : a modern puppet history , john bell , detroit institute of art , 2000 ,