image : michelsonmorley-boxplot.svg thumb figure 1 . box plot of data from the michelson–morley experiment displaying four outliers in the middle column , as well as one outlier in the first column . in statistics , an outlier is a data point that differs significantly from other observations . an outlier may be due to variability in the measurement or it may indicate experimental error ; the latter are sometimes excluded from the data set . stating '' an outlying observation may be merely an extreme manifestation of the random variability inherent in the data . on the other hand , an outlying observation may be the result of gross deviation from prescribed experimental procedure or an error in calculating or recording the numerical value . '' an outlier can cause serious problems in statistical analyses . outliers can occur by chance in any distribution , but they often indicate either measurement error or that the population has a heavy-tailed distribution . in the former case one wishes to discard them or use statistics that are robust to outliers , while in the latter case they indicate that the distribution has high skewness and that one should be very cautious in using tools or intuitions that assume a normal distribution . a frequent cause of outliers is a mixture of two distributions , which may be two distinct sub-populations , or may indicate 'correct trial ' versus 'measurement error ' ; this is modeled by a mixture model . in most larger samplings of data , some data points will be further away from the sample mean than what is deemed reasonable . this can be due to incidental systematic error or flaws in the theory that generated an assumed family of probability distributions , or it may be that some observations are far from the center of the data . outlier points can therefore indicate faulty data , erroneous procedures , or areas where a certain theory might not be valid . however , in large samples , a small number of outliers is to be expected ( and not due to any anomalous condition ) . outliers , being the most extreme observations , may include the sample maximum or sample minimum , or both , depending on whether they are extremely high or low . however , the sample maximum and minimum are not always outliers because they may not be unusually far from other observations . naive interpretation of statistics derived from data sets that include outliers may be misleading . for example , if one is calculating the average temperature of 10 objects in a room , and nine of them are between 20 and 25 degrees celsius , but an oven is at 175 & nbsp ; °c , the median of the data will be between 20 and 25 & nbsp ; °c but the mean temperature will be between 35.5 and 40 & nbsp ; °c . in this case , the median better reflects the temperature of a randomly sampled object ( but not the temperature in the room ) than the mean ; naively interpreting the mean as '' a typical sample '' , equivalent to the median , is incorrect . as illustrated in this case , outliers may indicate data points that belong to a different population than the rest of the sample set . estimators capable of coping with outliers are said to be robust : the median is a robust statistic of central tendency , while the mean is not . ripley , brian d . 2004 . robust statistics however , the mean is generally a more precise estimator . chandan mukherjee , howard white , marc wuyts , 1998 , '' econometrics and data analysis for developing countries vol . 1 ''