rogue ( also known as rogue : exploring the dungeons of doom ) is a dungeon crawling video game by michael toy and glenn wichman and later contributions by ken arnold . rogue was originally developed around 1980 for unix-based mainframe systems as a freely-distributed executable ( public domain software ) . 30.rogue/paper.pdf on freebsd.org '' the public domain version of rogue now distributed with berkeley unix '' it was later included in the official berkeley software distribution 4.2 operating system ( 4.2bsd ) . commercial ports of the game for a range of personal computers were made by toy , wichman , and jon lane under the company a.i . design and financially supported by the epyx software publishers . additional ports to modern systems have been made since by other parties using the game 's now-open source code . in rogue , players control a character as they explore several levels of a dungeon seeking the amulet of yendor located in the dungeon 's lowest level . the player-character must fend off an array of monsters that roam the dungeons . along the way , they can collect treasures that can help them offensively or defensively , such as weapons , armor , potions , scrolls , and other magical items . rogue is turn-based ; taking place on a square grid represented in ascii or other fixed character sets , allowing players to have time to determine the best move to survive . rogue implements permadeath as a design choice to make each action by the player meaningful : should the player-character lose all their health from combat or other means , the character is dead , and the player must restart a brand new character and can not reload from a saved state . the dungeon levels , monster encounters , and treasures are procedural generation on each playthrough , so that no game is the same as a previous one . rogue was inspired by text-based computer games such as the 1971 star trek game and colossal cave adventure released in 1976 , along with the high fantasy setting from dungeons & dragons . toy and wichman , both students at university of california santa cruz , worked together to create their own text-based game but looked to incorporate elements of procedural generation to create a new experience each time the user played the game . toy later worked at university of california berkeley where he met arnold , the lead developer of the curses programming library that rogue was dependent on to mimic a graphical display . arnold helped toy to optimize the code and incorporate additional features to the game . the commercial ports were inspired when toy met lane while working for the olivetti company , and toy engaged with wichman again to help with designing graphics and various ports . rogue became popular in the 1980s among college students and other computer-savvy users in part due to its inclusion in 4.2bsd . it inspired programmers to develop a number of similar titles such as hack ( 1982 ) and moria ( 1983 ) , though as toy , wichman , and arnold had not released the source code at this time , these new games introduced different variations atop rogue . a long lineage of games grew out from these titles . while rogue was not the first dungeon-crawling game with procedural generation features , it introduced the subgenre of roguelike rpg procedurally generated dungeon crawlers with dungeons & dragons-like items ( armor , weapons , potions , and magic scrolls ) that also had permadeath ( permanent death ) and an overhead graphical view ; albeit via ascii drawings , as opposed to text descriptions in natural language of colossal cave adventure and the original zork games .