the foundation degree is a qualification at lower than bachelor 's level awarded following a two-year programme of study that is usually vocational in nature . the foundation degree can be awarded by a university or college of higher education that has been granted foundation degree awarding powers by the uk government . this degree is comparable to an associate degree in the united states . the universities of oxford and cambridge award honorary master of arts ( ma ) degrees to graduates of their bachelor 's programmes , following a specified period of time . this is comparable to the practice of the ancient universities in scotland of awarding an ma for a first degree and arguably reflects the rigorous standards expected of their graduates . master 's degrees such as master of arts or master of science are typically awarded to students who have undertaken at least a year of full-time postgraduate study , which may be taught or , in many cases , involve an element of research . degrees such as master of philosophy ( mphil ) or master of letters/literature ( mlitt ) are likely to be awarded for postgraduate degrees involving original research . a student undertaking a master 's would normally be expected to already hold an honours degree in a relevant subject , hence the possibility of reaching master 's level in one year . some universities award a master 's as a first degree following an integrated programme of study ( an 'integrated master 's degree ' ) . these degrees are usually designated by the subject , such as master of engineering for engineering , master of physics for physics , master of mathematics for mathematics and so on ; it usually takes four years to read for them . graduation to these degrees is always with honours . master of engineering in particular has now become the standard first degree in engineering at the top uk universities , replacing the older bachelor of engineering . the master of business administration ( mba ) degree is highly valued by those seeking to advance in business as managers and decision makers . doctoral degrees or doctorates , such as the doctor of philosophy degree ( phd or dphil ) or doctor of education ( edd or ded ) are awarded following a programme of original research that contributes new knowledge within the context of the student 's discipline . doctoral degrees usually take three years full-time . therefore , in the uk it may only take seven years to progress from undergraduate to doctoral level – in some cases six , since having a master 's is not always a precondition for embarking on a doctoral degree . this contrasts with nine years in the united states , reflecting differences in the educational systems . some doctorates , such as the doctor of clinical psychology ( dclinpsy ) qualification , confirm competence to practice in particular professions . there are also higher doctorates – doctor of science ( dsc ) and doctor of letters/literature ( dlitt ) that are typically awarded to experienced academics who have demonstrated a high level of achievement in their academic career ; for example they may have published widely on their subject or become professors in their field . uk post-secondary qualifications are defined at different levels , with levels 1–3 denoting further education and levels 4–8 denoting higher education . within this structure , a foundation degree is at level 5 ; a bachelor 's degree at level 6 ; a master 's degree at level 7 ; and a doctoral degree at level 8 . full information about the expectations for different types of uk degree is published by the quality assurance agency for higher education . see also graduate certificate , graduate diploma , postgraduate certificate , postgraduate diploma and british degree abbreviations .