a central business district ( cbd ) is the commercial and business center of a city . it contains commercial space and offices . in larger cities , it is often synonymous with the city 's '' financial district '' . geographically , it often coincides with the '' city center '' or '' downtown '' , but the concepts are not mutually exclusive : many cities have a central business district located away from its commercial and or cultural center and or downtown/city center , or even several cbds at once . for instance , london 's city center is usually regarded as encompassing the historic city of london and the medieval city of westminster , while the city of london and the transformed docklands area containing canary wharf are regarded as its two respective cbds . in new york city , midtown manhattan is the largest central business district in the city and in the world . in chicago , the chicago loop is the second largest central business district in the united states and in the world . it is also referred to as the core of the city 's downtown . mexico city also has its own historic city center , the colonial-era '' centro histórico , '' along with two cbds : the mid-late 20th century paseo de la reforma – polanco , and the new santa fe , respectively . moscow and russia 's largest central business district is the moscow international business center . the shape and type of a cbd almost always closely reflect the city 's history . cities with strong preservation laws and maximum building height restrictions to retain the character of the historic and cultural core will have a cbd quite a distance from the city center . this practice is quite common for european cities such as paris , moscow , or vienna . in cities in the new world that grew quickly after the invention of modern transportation such as road or rail , a single central area or downtown will often contain most of the region 's tallest buildings and act both as the cbd and the commercial and cultural city center . increasing urbanization in the 21st century have developed megacity , particularly in asia , that will often have multiple cbds scattered across the urban area . it has been said that downtowns ( as understood in north america ) are therefore conceptually distinct from both cbds and city centers . '' reviving american downtowns '' . the economist . 1 march 2007 . although no two cbds look alike in terms of their spatial shape , however , certain geometric patterns in these areas are recurring throughout many cities due to the nature of centralized commercial and industrial activities .