price discrimination is a microeconomic pricing strategy where identical or largely similar goods or services are sold at different prices by the same provider in different markets . price discrimination is distinguished from product differentiation by the more substantial difference in production cost for the differently priced products involved in the latter strategy . price differentiation essentially relies on the variation in the customers ' willingness to pay apollo , m . ( 2014 ) . dual pricing–two points of view ( citizen and non-citizen ) case of entrance fees in tourist facilities in nepal . procedia-social and behavioral sciences , 120 , 414-422 . and in the demand elasticity . for price discrimination to succeed , a firm must have market power , such as a dominant market share , product uniqueness , sole pricing power , etc . all prices under price discrimination are higher than the equilibrium price in a perfectly-competitive market . however , some prices under price discrimination may be lower than the price charged by a single-price monopolist . the term differential pricing is also used to describe the practice of charging different prices to different buyers for the same quality and quantity of a product , but it can also refer to a combination of price differentiation and product differentiation . other terms used to refer to price discrimination include equity pricing , preferential pricing , dual pricing and tiered pricing . within the broader domain of price differentiation , a commonly accepted classification dating to the 1920s is : personalized pricing ( or first-degree price differentiation ) — selling to each customer at a different price ; this is also called one-to-one marketing . the optimal incarnation of this is called perfect price discrimination and maximizes the price that each customer is willing to pay . product versioning or simply versioning ( or second-degree price differentiation ) — offering a product line by creating slightly different products for the purpose of price differentiation , i.e . a vertical product line . another name given to versioning is menu pricing . group pricing ( or third-degree price differentiation ) — dividing the market into segments and charging a different price to each segment ( but the same price to each member of that segment ) . this is essentially a heuristic approximation that simplifies the problem in face of the difficulties with personalized pricing . typical examples include student discounts and seniors ' discounts .