in computing , a plug and play ( pnp ) device or computer bus is one with a specification that facilitates the discovery of a hardware component in a system without the need for physical device configuration or user intervention in resolving resource conflicts . the term '' plug and play '' has since been expanded to a wide variety of applications to which the same lack of user setup applies . expansion devices are controlled and exchange data with the host system through defined memory or i/o space port addresses , direct memory access channels , interrupt request lines and other mechanisms , which must be uniquely associated with a particular device to operate . some computers provided unique combinations of these resources to each slot of a cpu cache or backplane . other designs provided all resources to all slots , and each peripheral device had its own address decoding for the registers or memory blocks it needed to communicate with the host system . since fixed assignments made expansion of a system difficult , devices used several manual methods for assigning addresses and other resources , such as hard-wired jumpers , pins that could be connected with wire or removable straps , or switches that could be set for particular addresses . as microprocessors made mass-market computers affordable , software configuration of i/o devices was advantageous to allow installation by non-specialist users . early systems for software configuration of devices included the msx standard , nubus , amiga autoconfig , and ibm microchannel . initially all expansion cards for the ibm pc required physical selection of i/o configuration on the board with jumper straps or dip switches , but increasingly isa bus devices were arranged for software configuration . by 1995 , microsoft windows included a comprehensive method of enumerating hardware at boot time and allocating resources , which was called the '' plug and play '' standard . plug and play devices can have resources allocated at boot-time only , or may be hotplug systems such as usb and ieee 1394 ( firewire ) . plug and play definition