the score for insurrection was composed by jerry goldsmith ; his fourth score for the franchise . bond : p . 163 goldsmith continued using the march and klingon themes written for star trek : the motion picture in 1979 , adding new themes and variations . insurrection opens with alexander courage 's star trek : the original series fanfare , introducing a six-note motif used in many of the film 's action sequences . the ba'ku are scored with a pastoral theme with repeating harps , string sections and a woodwind solo . the ba'ku 's ability to slow time was accompanied with a variation of this music . bond : p . 164 goldsmith used quick bursts of brass music to accompany the starship sequences . for scenes in which observers are watching the ba'ku unseen , goldsmith used a '' spying theme '' that resembles his conspiracy theme from capricorn one . composed of a piano , timpani percussion , and brass , the theme builds until it is interrupted by the action theme as data opens fire . goldsmith did not write a motif for the son ' a , but scored the action sequence without designating the son ' a as an antagonist , suggesting the film 's revelation that the son ' a and ba'ku are related . the film 's climax is scored with the action theme , which is balanced with '' sense of wonder '' music similar to cues from the motion picture . one scene in the film shows patrick stewart and brent spiner conducting a duet of a british tar from the gilbert and sullivan comic-opera h.m.s . pinafore . this replaced the original idea of picard and data reciting scenes from shakespeare 's play king lear . piller1998 : p . 80 stewart had suggested that they sing three little maids from school are we from the mikado instead , but the producers described this as '' too vulgar '' . stewart and spiner had previously sung together on spiner 's 1991 album ol ' yellow eyes is back . in 2013 , gnp crescendo records re-released the soundtrack for the film as an expanded collector 's edition gnpd 8082 , featuring previously unreleased tracks by goldsmith plus four bonus tracks . jerry goldsmith ( 1998 ) . '' star trek : insurrection expanded collector 's edition '' gnp crescendo records . retrieved august 21 , 2013