the american israel public affairs committee ( aipac is a advocacy group that advocates pro-israel policies to the congress and executive branch of the united states . the current president of aipac is betsy berns korn . one of several israel lobby in the united states in the united states , why opposing the israel lobby is no longer political suicide the nation , july 15 , 2014 aipac states that it has over 100,000 members , aipac web site accessed april 18 , 2007 17 regional offices , and '' a vast pool of donors . '' representative brad sherman ( d-california ) has called aipac '' the single most important organization in promoting the u.s.-israel alliance . '' in addition , the organization has been called one of the most powerful lobbying groups in the united states . the group does not raise funds for political candidates itself , but its members raise money for candidates through political action committees unaffiliated with aipac and by other means . its critics have stated it acts as an agent of the israeli government with a '' stranglehold '' on the united states congress with its power and influence . aipac has been accused of being strongly allied with the likud party of israel , and the republican party in the u.s . , but an aipac spokesman has called this a '' malicious mischaracterization . '' the washington post described the perceived differences between aipac and j street : '' while both groups call themselves bipartisan , aipac has won support from an overwhelming majority of republican jews , while j street is presenting itself as an alternative for democrats who have grown uncomfortable with both netanyahu 's policies and the conservatives ' flocking to aipac . '' jeremy ben-ami , winning a place at the table for j street the washington post , march 26 , 2015 aipac has maintained high levels of participation from democratic and republican lawmakers . aipac describes itself as a bipartisan organization , and the bills for which it lobbies in congress are always jointly sponsored by both a democrat and republican . aipac : claims and facts 101 the times of israel . february 12 , 2012 aipac 's supporters claim its bipartisan nature can be seen at its yearly policy conference , which in 2016 included both major parties ' nominees—democrat hillary clinton and republican donald trump—as well as high-ranking democrats , including former vice president joe biden and senator kamala harris ( both of whom ran for president in the 2020 democratic presidential primary ) , and high-ranking republicans , including speaker of the house paul ryan .