the sievert ( symbol : sv not be confused with the sverdrup or the svedberg , two non-si units that sometimes use the same symbol . ) is a derived unit of ionizing radiation dose in the international system of units ( si ) and is a measure of the health effect of low levels of ionizing radiation on the human body . the sievert is important in dosimetry and radiation protection , and is named after rolf maximilian sievert , a swedish medical physicist renowned for work on radiation dose measurement and research into the biological effects of radiation . the sievert is used for radiation dose quantities such as equivalent dose and effective dose , which represent the risk of external radiation from sources outside the body , and committed dose which represents the risk of internal irradiation due to inhaled or ingested radioactive substances . the sievert is intended to represent the stochastic health risk , which for radiation dose assessment is defined as the probability of radiation-induced cancer and genetic damage . one sievert carries with it a 5.5 % chance of eventually developing fatal cancer based on the linear no-threshold model . the icrp says , '' in the low dose range , below about 100 msv , it is scientifically plausible to assume that the incidence of cancer or heritable effects will rise in direct proportion to an increase in the equivalent dose in the relevant organs and tissues . '' icrp publication 103 paragraph 64 to enable consideration of stochastic health risk , calculations are performed to convert the physical quantity absorbed dose into equivalent dose and effective dose , the details of which depend on the radiation type and biological context . for applications in radiation protection and dosimetry assessment the international commission on radiological protection ( icrp ) and international commission on radiation units and measurements ( icru ) have published recommendations and data which are used to calculate these . these are under continual review , and changes are advised in the formal '' reports '' of those bodies . conventionally , the sievert is not used for high dose rates of radiation that produce deterministic effects , which is the severity of acute tissue damage that is certain to happen , such as acute radiation syndrome ; these effects are compared to the physical quantity absorbed dose measured by the unit gray ( gy ) . icrp report 103 para 104 and 105 one sievert equals 100 rem . the rem is an older , non-si unit of measurement .