being and nothingness : an essay on phenomenological ontology , sometimes published with the subtitle a phenomenological essay on ontology , is a 1943 book by the philosopher jean-paul sartre . in the book , sartre develops a philosophical account in support of his existentialism , dealing with topics such as consciousness , perception , social philosophy , self-deception , the existence of '' nothingness '' , psychoanalysis , and the question of free will . while a prisoner of war in 1940 and 1941 , sartre read martin heidegger 's being and time ( 1927 ) , which uses the method of husserlian phenomenology as a lens for examining ontology . sartre attributed the course of his own philosophical inquiries to his exposure to this work . though influenced by heidegger , sartre was profoundly skeptical of any measure by which humanity could achieve a kind of personal state of fulfillment comparable to the hypothetical heideggerian '' re-encounter with being '' . in sartre 's account , man is a creature haunted by a vision of '' completion '' ( what sartre calls the ens causa sui , meaning literally '' a being that causes itself '' ) , which many religions and philosophers identify as god . born into the material reality of one 's body , in a material universe , one finds oneself inserted into being . in accordance with husserl 's notion that consciousness can only exist as consciousness of something , sartre develops the idea that there can be no form of self that is '' hidden '' inside consciousness . on these grounds , sartre goes on to offer a philosophical critique of sigmund freud 's theories , based on the claim that consciousness is essentially self-conscious . being and nothingness is regarded as both the most important non-fiction expression of sartre 's existentialism and his most influential philosophical work , original despite its debt to heidegger . many have praised the book 's central notion that '' existence precedes essence '' , its introduction of the concept of bad faith , and its exploration of '' nothingness '' , as well as its novel contributions to the philosophy of sex . however , the book has been criticized for its abstruseness and for its treatment of freud .