in architecture , a folly is a building constructed primarily for decoration , but suggesting through its appearance some other purpose , or of such extravagant appearance that it transcends the range of usual garden buildings . eighteenth-century english landscape gardening and french landscape gardening often featured mock roman temples , symbolising classical virtues . other 18th-century garden follies represented chinese temples , egyptian pyramids , ruined medieval castles or abbeys , or tatar tents , to represent different continents or historical eras . sometimes they represented rustic villages , mills , and cottages to symbolise rural virtues . yves-marie allain , janine christiany , l'art des jardins en europe , citadelles & mazenod , paris , 2006 . many follies , particularly during times of famine , such as the great famine in ireland , were built as a form of poor relief , to provide employment for peasants and unemployed artisans . in english , the term began as '' a popular name for any costly structure considered to have shown folly in the builder '' , the oed 's definition , oxford english dictionary , 2nd ed . , 1989 , vol vi , p4 , '' folly , 5 '' . and were often named after the individual who commissioned or designed the project . the connotations of silliness or madness in this definition is in accord with the general meaning of the french word '' folie '' ; however , another older meaning of this word is '' delight '' or '' favourite abode '' . '' . and many french houses are still named '' la folie '' '' – oed . this sense included conventional , practical , buildings that were thought unduly large or expensive , such as beckford 's folly , an extremely expensive early gothic revival country house that collapsed under the weight of its tower in 1825 , 12 years after completion . as a general term , '' folly '' is usually applied to a small building that appears to have no practical purpose or the purpose of which appears less important than its striking and unusual design , but the term is ultimately subjective , so a precise definition is not possible .