uss pennsylvania ( bb-38 ) was the lead ship of the of super-dreadnought battleships built for the united states navy in the 1910s . the pennsylvanias were part of the standard-type battleship series , and marked an incremental improvement over the preceding , carrying an extra pair of guns for a total of twelve guns . named for the commonwealth of pennsylvania , she was laid down at the newport news shipbuilding in october 1913 , was launched in march 1915 , and was commissioned in june 1916 . equipped with an oil-burning propulsion system , pennsylvania was not sent to european waters during world war i , since the necessary fuel oil was not as readily available as coal . instead , she remained in american waters and took part in training exercises ; in 1918 , she escorted president woodrow wilson to france to take part in peace negotiations . during the 1920s and 1930s , pennsylvania served as the flagship of first the atlantic fleet , and after it was merged with the pacific fleet in 1921 , the battle fleet . for the majority of this period , the ship was stationed in california , based in san pedro . pennsylvania was occupied with a peacetime routine of training exercises ( including the annual fleet problems ) , port visits , and foreign cruises , including a visit to australia in 1925 . the ship was modernized in 1929–1931 . the ship was present in pearl harbor on the morning of 7 december 1941 ; she was in drydock with a pair of destroyers when the japanese launched attack on pearl harbor . she suffered relatively minor damage in the attack , being protected from torpedoes by the drydock . while repairs were effected , the ship received a modernized anti-aircraft battery to prepare her for operations in the pacific war . pennsylvania joined the fleet in a series of amphibious operations , primarily tasked with providing gunfire support . the first of these , the aleutian islands campaign , took place in mid-1943 , and was followed by an battle of makin later that year . during 1944 , she supported the battle of kwajalein and eniwetok in the marshall islands and the mariana and palau islands campaign , including the battle of saipan , guam , peleliu , and battle of angaur . during the philippines campaign , in addition to her typical shore bombardment duties , she took part in the battle of surigao strait , though due to her inadequate radar , she was unable to locate a target and did not fire . during the battle of okinawa , she was torpedoed by a japanese torpedo bomber and badly damaged , forcing her to withdraw for repairs days before the end of the war . allocated to the target ship for the operation crossroads nuclear tests in 1946 , pennsylvania was repaired only enough to allow her to make the voyage to the test site , bikini atoll . she survived both blasts , but was badly contaminated with radioactive fallout from the second test , and so was towed to kwajalein , where she was studied for the next year and a half . the ship was ultimately scuttled in deep water off the atoll in february 1948 .