bolshevism ( from bolshevik ) is a revolutionary marxism current of political thought and political regime associated with the formation of a rigidly centralized , cohesive and disciplined party of social revolution , focused on overthrowing the existing capitalism state system , seizing power and establishing the '' dictatorship of the proletariat '' . conference of the russian social democratic labor party in 1912 . documents and materials – moscow : russian political encyclopedia , 2008 – 1120 pages – ( series '' political parties of russia . late 19th – first third of the 20th century . documentary heritage '' ) – , alexander tarasov . the sacred function of the revolutionary subject it originated at the beginning of the 20th century in russia and was associated with the activities of the bolshevik faction within the russian social democratic labour party – and first of all , the founder of the faction , vladimir lenin . remaining on the soil of marxism , bolshevism at the same time absorbed elements of the ideology and practice of the revolutionaries of the second half of the 19th century ( sergey nechaev , pyotr tkachev , nikolay chernyshevsky ) and had many points of contact with such domestic left–wing radical movements as populism . the main theorist of bolshevism was lenin , besides him , the theoreticians of bolshevism include joseph stalin , nikolai bukharin , yevgeni preobrazhensky and sometimes rosa luxemburg . in october 1917 , the bolshevik faction organized an armed uprising against the provisional government , formed by other ( including socialist ) parties and seized power ( see the october revolution ) . the historical consequences of these actions both for russia and for the world as a whole have opposite assessments . some researchers vladik nersesyants . history of political and legal doctrines also attribute the activities of joseph stalin to the bolshevik theory , who headed the communist party of the soviet union and at the same time possessed full state power in the soviet union . however , others ( both stalin 's contemporaries and later ) do not confuse '' bolshevism '' and '' stalinism '' proper , considering them to be multidirectional ( revolutionary and thermidorian ) phenomena . see various works by trotsky , martemyan ryutin ( stalin and the crisis of the proletarian dictatorship ) , fyodor raskolnikov ( an open letter to stalin ) , boris kagarlitsky , alexander tarasov the expression '' bolshevism '' , as well as '' communism '' later , has become established in western historiography in the sense of a certain set of features of soviet power in a certain political period . at present , the very name '' bolsheviks '' is actively used by various groups of marxism–leninism and trotskyism .