a now infamous scene , in which ken comes face-to-face with mike following the discovery of the affair and a showdown ensues , was originally scripted differently . ken was intended to stand and meekly watch mike and deirdre chatting on his doorstep . roache disliked this version , as he believed ken 's response lacked realism . partly fuelled by his previous frustration with ken 's '' lame '' characterisation , roache approached the episode 's director , brian mills , and requested that ken be allowed to hit mike . though the filming set-up planned for the scene did not allow for this , it was agreed that ken would attempt to hit mike , and that deirdre would intervene . refmylife , pp.22–24 in the transmitted scene , deirdre did intervene , resulting in ken attempting to manhandle her . roache recalls , '' every time i looked at the words and at what was supposed to happen i knew it just did n't ring true . poor annie was n't prepared for what happened to her next and actually burst into tears because of the ferocity of my performance . she was shaken up by it , and when it came to the moment for mike baldwin to knock at the door she got an even bigger shock . after baldwin asked why deirdre had put the phone down when he 'd called earlier , i slammed the door shut with my left hand and then slammed poor annie against the door itself , leaving her shaken and shocked . she then made her way into the barlows ' living room , sobbing her heart out , and brian left the cameras rolling , capturing anne 's genuine distress . '' the storyline was described as the most volatile and explosive in the programme 's history . roache recalls viewers taking it very seriously , to the point that he received letters reading : '' dear ken , i though you should know that mike baldwin is seeing your wife ! '' refmylife , p . 130 he related that , '' when deirdre decided to stop seeing mike and stay with ken , the scoreboard at old trafford on the night flashed the message that the couple were not splitting up to 56,000 football fans , amid thunderous cheers from the crowd ! '' 20 & nbsp ; million viewers tuned in for the episode ; it attained the soap 's second-highest recorded overnight ratings , surpassed only by the farewell episode of hilda ogden ( played by jean alexander ) in 1987 . ken and deidre have been described as soap opera 's version of richard burton and elizabeth taylor . their relationship featured various affairs , break-ups and reunions over the years . the couple 's first marriage eventually disintegrated in the early 1990s , this time when ken had an affair with colleague wendy crozier , a dalliance which ended in divorce for the barlows . ken was kicked out of home on new year 's day 1990 . their on/off relationship continued , with each having various other liaisons , until producers decided to reunite ken and deidre in 1999 . roache said , '' i was pleased . it seemed to fit perfectly with the lives that had been created for them throughout their time in coronation street . they had both gone off and done very silly things and had had affairs with people , and yet their overriding need as they got older was for each other . '' ken and deirdre 's second marriage in 2005 was watched by an estimated 13 million viewers , compared to the nine million who watched the wedding of prince charles to camilla parker bowles the following day . coincidentally , ken and deirdre 's first wedding in 1981 was screened within 48 hours of prince charles and princess diana 's wedding , and just as in 2005 , the barlow wedding attracted more viewers than the royal wedding . during anne kirkbride 's lifetime , roache was complimentary about ken and deirdre , as well as about kirkbride—whom , he stated , he loved as much as ken loved deirdre—with this love explaining why ken always ended up returning to her . speaking in 2010 , roache said : '' we have been together on screen for pretty much 30 years now and so much of what we do on camera is instinctive . we really are like an old married couple who have had their ups and downs , lived through them and come out the other side . ''