the royal shakespeare company ( rsc ) is a major british theatre company , based in stratford-upon-avon , warwickshire , england . the company employs over 1,000 staff and produces around 20 productions a year . the rsc plays regularly in london , stratford-upon-avon , and on tour across the uk and internationally . the company 's home is in stratford-upon-avon , where it has redeveloped its royal shakespeare and swan theatres as part of a £112.8-million '' transformation '' project . the theatres re-opened in november 2010 , having closed in 2007 . the new buildings attracted 18,000 visitors within the first week and received a positive media response both upon opening , and following the first full shakespeare performances . performances in stratford-upon-avon continued throughout the transformation project at the temporary courtyard theatre . as well as the plays of shakespeare and his contemporaries , the rsc produces new work from living artists and develops creative links with theatre-makers from around the world , as well as working with teachers to inspire a lifelong love of william shakespeare in young people and running events for everyone to explore and participate in its work . the rsc celebrated its fiftieth birthday season from april–december 2011 , with two companies of actors presenting the first productions designed specifically for the new royal shakespeare and swan theatre stages . the 2011-season began with performances of macbeth and a re-imagined lost work the history of cardenio . the fiftieth birthday season also featured the merchant of venice with sir patrick stewart and revivals of some of the rsc 's greatest plays , including a new staging of marat/sade . for the london 2012 festival as part of the cultural olympiad , the rsc produced the world shakespeare festival , featuring artists from across the world performing in venues around the uk . in 2013 , the company began live screenings of its shakespeare productions – called live from stratford-upon-avon – which are screened around the world . in 2016 , the company collaborated with intel and the imaginarium studios to stage the tempest , bringing performance capture to the royal shakespeare theatre for the first time .