image : interferometer.svg thumb 250px figure 1 . the light path through a michelson interferometer . the two light rays with a common source combine at the half-silvered mirror to reach the detector . they may either interfere constructively ( strengthening in intensity ) if their light waves arrive in phase , or interfere destructively ( weakening in intensity ) if they arrive out of phase , depending on the exact distances between the three mirrors . interferometry is a technique in which waves , usually electromagnetic waves , are superimposed , causing the phenomenon of interference , which is used to extract information . interferometry is an important investigative technique in the fields of astronomy , fiber optics , engineering metrology , optical metrology , oceanography , seismology , spectroscopy ( and its applications to chemistry ) , quantum mechanics , nuclear and particle physics , plasma physics , remote sensing , interactome , surface profiling , microfluidics , mechanical stress/strain measurement , velocimetry , optometry , and making holograms . interferometers are widely used in science and industry for the measurement of small displacements , refractive index changes and surface irregularities . in most interferometers , light from a single source is split into two beams that travel in different optical paths , which are then combined again to produce interference ; however , under some circumstances , two incoherent sources can also be made to interfere . the resulting interference fringes give information about the difference in optical path lengths . in analytical science , interferometers are used to measure lengths and the shape of optical components with nanometer precision ; they are the highest precision length measuring instruments in existence . in fourier transform spectroscopy they are used to analyze light containing features of absorption or emission associated with a substance or mixture . an astronomical interferometer consists of two or more separate telescopes that combine their signals , offering a resolution equivalent to that of a telescope of diameter equal to the largest separation between its individual elements .