learning is the process of acquiring new understanding , knowledge , behaviors , skills , values , attitudes , and preferences . richard gross , psychology : the science of mind and behaviour 6e , hachette uk , . the ability to learn is possessed by human , animal , and some machines ; there is also evidence for some kind of learning in certain plant . karban , r . ( 2015 ) . plant learning and memory . in : plant sensing and communication . chicago and london : the university of chicago press , pp . 31–44 , some learning is immediate , induced by a single event ( e.g . being burn by a hot stove ) , but much skill and knowledge accumulate from repeated experiences . the changes induced by learning often last a lifetime , and it is hard to distinguish learned material that seems to be '' lost '' from that which can not be retrieved . human learning starts at birth ( it might even start before ) and continues until death as a consequence of ongoing interactions between people and their environment . the nature and processes involved in learning are studied in many fields , including educational psychology , neuropsychology , experimental psychology , and pedagogy . research in such fields has led to the identification of various sorts of learning . for example , learning may occur as a result of habituation , or classical conditioning , operant conditioning or as a result of more complex activities such as play , seen only in relatively intelligent animals . jungle gyms : the evolution of animal play learning may occur consciously or without conscious awareness . learning that an aversive event ca n't be avoided nor escaped may result in a condition called learned helplessness . there is evidence for human behavioral learning prenatally , in which habituation has been observed as early as 32 weeks into gestation , indicating that the central nervous system is sufficiently developed and primed for learning and memory to occur very early on in development . play has been approached by several theorists as a form of learning . children experiment with the world , learn the rules , and learn to interact through play . lev vygotsky agrees that play is pivotal for children 's development , since they make meaning of their environment through playing educational games . for vygotsky , however , play is the first form of learning language and communication and the stage where a child begins to understand rules and symbols .