the draize test is an acute toxicity test devised in 1944 by food and drug administration ( fda ) toxicologists john h . draize and jacob m . spines . initially used for testing cosmetics , the procedure involves applying 0.5ml or 0.5g of a test substance to the eye or skin of a restrained , conscious animal , and then leaving it for set amount of time before rinsing it out and recording its effects . used as a source for '' conscious and restrained . '' the animals are observed for up to 14 days for signs of erythema and edema in the skin test , and redness , swelling , discharge , ulceration , hemorrhaging , cloudiness , or blindness in the tested eye . the test subject is commonly an albino rabbit , though other species are used too , including dogs . carbone 2004 , p . 24 , with an image , fig 2.1 , of two restrained rabbits and one dog undergoing draize testing , citing the journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics . the animals are euthanized after testing if the test renders irreversible damage to the eye or skin . animals may be re-used for testing purposes if the product tested causes no permanent damage . animals are typically reused after a '' wash out '' period during which all traces of the tested product are allowed to disperse from the test site . animals in product testing , national anti-vivisection society , retrieved 29 june 2009 . the tests are controversial . they are viewed as cruel as well as unscientific by critics because of the differences between rabbit and human eyes , and the subjective nature of the visual evaluations . the fda supports the test , stating that '' to date , no single test , or battery of tests , has been accepted by the scientific community as a replacement for . the draize test '' . '' validation of in vitro methods : regulatory issues '' , animal welfare information center newsletter , summer 1994 , vol . 5 , no . 2 because of its controversial nature , the use of the draize test in the u.s . and europe has declined in recent years and is sometimes modified so that anaesthetics are administered and lower doses of the test substances used . alternatives to animal testing web site , retrieved 29 june 2009 . chemicals already shown to have adverse effects in vitro are not currently used in a draize test , eye irritation caused by chemicals , 3r research foundation , retrieved 29 june 2009 . thereby reducing the number and severity of tests that are carried out .