八十九，參見：蕭國健（1995）「宋代的香港」《香港古代史》，香港：中華書局，第58-70頁 in 1276 , the southern song dynasty court fled to guangdong by boat to escape mongol invaders , leaving emperor gong of song behind . the resistance centred on two young princes , emperor gong 's brothers . the older boy zhao shi , was declared emperor at the age of nine , ascending the throne as emperor duanzong of song . in 1277 , the imperial court sought refuge first in silvermine bay ( mui wo ) on lantau island ( then known as gangzhou , and later in today 's kowloon city . the older brother became ill , died , and was succeeded by the younger brother zhao bing ( emperor bing of song ) at the age of seven . he died in 1279 , and the song dynasty ended . these emperors are also believed to have held court in the tung chung valley , which takes its name from a local hero who gave up his life for the emperor . lantau island and tuen mun were among the first european trading settlements in the pearl river area , established by portugal traders in the 1510s . the portuguese abandoned these settlements in around 1517 , following their defeat by chinese troops . lantau was visited in 1607 by one of the early dutch east india company ( voc ) fleet commanders cornelis matelieff de jonge who describes his visit to the local '' mandarin '' . a drawing of this officials ' compound was published in the 1648 edition of matelieff 's travelogue . peter borschberg , ed . , journal , memorials and letters of cornelis matelieff de jonge . war , diplomacy and commerce in 17th-century southeast asia , singapore : nus press , 2015 , much later the island became an important trading post for the british , long before they became interested in hong kong island . there were nine settlements on the island in the early 16th century : kai kung tau , shek pik , tai o , sha lo wan , tung sai chung , now known as tung chung ) , tai ho shan , now known as lantau peak ) , mui wo , lo pui o ( now known as pui o ) and tong fuk . the island was evacuated during about a decade , following the orders imposed by the great clearance , and people were allowed to return to settle on the island in 1669 . five villages were subsequently resettled : tai o , tung sai chung , lo pui o , shek pik and mui wo . salt was illegally produced in lantau island . this was discovered by the chinese rulers during the 16th century , and the local warlord put many islanders to death as a result . like cheung chau , lantau was once a base for pirates and smugglers , and was one of the haunts of cheung po tsai in the 19th century . silver was mined at mui wo until the 19th century . lantau was a major site of resistance against the japanese during the second world war . the resistance movement made use of the island 's wooded areas and deep valleys in order to organise ambushes and move supplies . the resistance movement persevered through the war until the end of the japanese occupation in 1945 . in 2000 , lantau island acted as an important base for the fiber-optic link around the globe project and the apcn ( cable system ) which acts as an internet bridge to the rest of the world .