the end time ( also called end times , end of time , end of days , last days , final days , doomsday , or eschaton ) is a future described variously in the eschatology of several world religions ( both abrahamic and non-abrahamic ) , which teach that world events will reach a climax . the abrahamic religions maintain a linear cosmology , with end-time scenarios containing themes of transformation and redemption . in later judaism , the term '' end of days '' makes reference to the messianic age and includes an in-gathering of the exiled jewish diaspora , the coming of the messiah , the techiyat hamaysim , and the world to come . some sects of christianity depict the end time as a period of tribulation that precedes the second coming of christ , who will face the antichrist along with his power structure and usher in the kingdom of god . in islam , the yawm al-qiyāmah is preceded by the appearance of the masih ad-dajjal , and followed by the descending of isa ( jesus ) . isa will triumph over the false messiah , or the antichrist , which will lead to a sequence of events that will end with the sun rising from the west and the beginning of the qiyamah ( judgment day ) . non-abrahamic religions tend to have more cyclical world-views , with end-time eschatologies characterized by decay , redemption , and rebirth . in hinduism , the end time occurs when kalki , the final incarnation of vishnu , descends atop a white horse and brings an end to the current kali yuga . in buddhism , the buddha predicted his teachings would be forgotten after 5,000 years , followed by turmoil . a bodhisattva named maitreya will appear and rediscover the teaching of dharma . the ultimate destruction of the world will then come through seven suns . since the development of the concept of deep time in the 18th century and the calculation of the estimated age of the earth , scientific discourse about end times has considered the ultimate fate of the universe . theories have included the big rip , big crunch , big bounce , and big freeze ( heat death ) .