butrint , was an ancient greek and later roman city and bishopric in epirus . '' speakers of these various greek dialects settled different parts of greece at different times during the middle bronze age , with one group , the 'northwest ' greeks , developing their own dialect and peopling central epirus . this was the origin of the molossian or epirotic tribes . '' '' . a proper dialect of greek , like the dialects spoken by dorians and molossians . '' '' the western mountains were peopled by the molossians ( the western greeks of epirus ) . '' '' that the molossians . spoke illyrian or another barbaric tongue was nowhere suggested , although aeschylus and pindar wrote of molossian lands . that they in fact spoke greek was implied by herodotus ' inclusion of molossi among the greek colonists of asia minor , but became demonstrable only when d . evangelides published two long inscriptions of the molossian state , set up p . 369 bc at dodona , in greek and with greek names , greek patronymies and greek tribal names such as celaethi , omphales , tripolitae , triphylae etc . as the molossian cluster of tribes in the time of hecataeus included the orestae , pelagones , lyncestae , tymphaei and elimeotae , as we have argued above , we may be confindent that they too were greek-speaking . '' '' epirus was a land of milk and animal products . the social unit was a small tribe , consisting of several nomadic or semi-nomadic groups , and these tribes , of which more than seventy names are known , coalesced into large tribal coalitions , three in number : thesprotians , molossians and chaonians . we know from the discovery of inscriptions that these tribes were speaking the greek language ( in a west-greek dialect ) '' perhaps inhabited since prehistoric times , buthrotum was a city of the epirote tribe of the chaonians , later a roman colony and a bishopric . it entered into decline in late antiquity , before being abandoned during the middle ages after a major earthquake flooded most of the city . in modern times it is an archaeology site in vlorë county , albania , some 14 & nbsp ; kilometres south of sarandë and close to the greek border . it is located on a hill overlooking the vivari channel and is part of the butrint national park . today bouthrotum is a latin catholic titular see and also features the ali pasha castle . the city is considered as one of the most important archaeological sites in albania . on the strength of the immense wealth of culture , history and nature value with a considerable history , butrint was declared a unesco world heritage site in 1992 and further a national park in 2000 .