a chapel is a christian place of prayer and worship that is usually relatively small , and is distinguished from a church . the term has several senses . firstly , smaller spaces inside a church that have their own altar are often called chapels ; the lady chapel is a common type of these . secondly , a chapel is a place of worship , sometimes non-denominational , that is part of a building or complex with some other main purpose , such as a school , college , hospital , palace or large aristocratic house , castle , barracks , prison , funeral home , cemetery , airport , or a military or commercial ship . thirdly , chapels are small places of worship , built as satellite sites by a church or monastery , for example in remote areas ; these are often called a chapel of ease . a feature of all these types is that often no clergy were permanently resident or specifically attached to the chapel . finally , for historical reasons , chapel is also often the term used by independent or nonconformist denominations for their places of worship in great britain , even where they are large and in practice they operate as a parish church . the early christianity places of worship are now often referred to as chapels , as they were not dedicated buildings but rather a dedicated chamber within a building . most larger churches had one or more secondary altars which , if they occupied a distinct space , would often be called a chapel . in russian orthodox tradition , the chapels were built underneath city gates , where most people could visit them . the most famous example is the iberian chapel . although chapels frequently refer to christian places of worship , they are also commonly found in jewish synagogues and do not necessarily denote a specific denomination . in england—where the church of england is established by law—non-denominational or inter-faith chapels in such institutions may nonetheless be consecrated by the local anglican bishop . non-denominational chapels are commonly encountered as part of a non-religious institution such as a hospital , airport , university or prison . many military installations have chapels for the use of military personnel , normally under the leadership of a military chaplain .