image : saabhengine.jpg thumb right 300px egr valve the top of box on top of the inlet manifold of a saab h engine in a 1987 saab 90 in internal combustion engines , exhaust gas recirculation ( egr ) is a nitrogen oxide emissions reduction technique used in petrol engine and diesel engines . egr works by recirculating a portion of an engine 's exhaust gas back to the engine cylinders . this dilutes the in the incoming air stream and provides gases inert to combustion to act as absorbents of combustion heat to reduce peak in-cylinder temperatures . is produced in high temperature mixtures of atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen that occur in the combustion cylinder , and this usually occurs at cylinder peak pressure . another primary benefit of external egr valves on a spark ignition engine is an increase in efficiency , as charge dilution allows a larger throttle position and reduces associated pumping losses . in a gasoline engine , this inert exhaust displaces some amount of combustible charge in the cylinder , effectively reducing the quantity of charge available for combustion without affecting the air-fuel ratio . in a diesel engine , the exhaust gas replaces some of the excess oxygen in the pre-combustion mixture . exhaust emissions and driveability – chrysler corporation , 1973 because forms primarily when a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen is subjected to high temperature , the lower combustion chamber temperatures caused by egr reduces the amount of the combustion generates . gases re-introduced from egr systems will also contain near equilibrium concentrations of and co ; the small fraction initially within the combustion chamber inhibits the total net production of these and other pollutants when sampled on a time average . chemical properties of different fuels limit how much egr may be used . for example methanol is more tolerant to egr than gasoline . sileghem & van de giste , 2011 . quote : '' the results on the audi-engine indicate that methanol is more egr tolerant than gasoline , due to its higher flame speed . an egr tolerance of 27 % was found when methanol was used . the efficiencies of the methanol-fueled engine obtained with egr are higher to those obtained with throttled stoichiometric operation . ''