neocolonialism is the practice of using economics , globalization , cultural imperialism and conditional aid to influence a country instead of the previous colonialism of direct military control ( imperialism ) or indirect political control ( hegemony ) . neocolonialism differs from standard globalisation and development aid in that it typically results in a relationship of dependence , subservience , or financial obligation towards the neocolonialist nation . this may result in an undue degree of political control or spiraling debt obligations , functionally imitating the relationship of traditional colonialism . coined by the french philosopher jean-paul sartre in 1956 , it was first used by kwame nkrumah in the context of african countries undergoing decolonisation in the 1960s . neocolonialism is also discussed in the works of western thinkers such as jean-paul sartre ( colonialism and neocolonialism , 1964 ) cases in which this has ended with china acquiring foreign land have led to accusations of '' debt-trap diplomacy '' . other analysts have concluded that china is likely trying to '' stockpile international support for contentious political issues . '' commentators have stated that western perceptions of china 's motives are misconstrued due to western conceptions of development as seen through their own lens of exploitation of others for resources—as exemplified by european colonialism—instead of through chinese conceptions of development . in 2018 , malaysian prime minister mahathir mohamad cancelled two china-funded projects . he also talked about fears of malaysia becoming '' indebted '' and of a '' new version of colonialism . '' he later clarified that he did not refer to the belt and road initiative or china with this . according to anderlini of the financial times , pakistan is at risk of becoming a colony of china . langan ( 2017 ) stated that western actors tend to paint china as a threat in africa , othering it from themselves , but it neglects the fact that europe , the united states , china , and other emerging powers likewise facilitate economic and political interests through aid and trade in a manner that conflicts with african sovereignty .