a medication ( also referred to as medicine , pharmaceutical drug , medicinal drug or simply drug ) is a drug used to diagnose , cure , treat , or prevent disease . us federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , sec . 210 . , ( g ) ( 1 ) ( b ) . accessed 17 august 2008 . directive 2004/27/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 31 march 2004 amending directive 2001/83/ec on the community code relating to medicinal products for human use . article 1 . published 31 march 2004 . accessed 17 august 2008 . drug therapy ( pharmacotherapy ) is an important part of the medicine and relies on the science of pharmacology for continual advancement and on pharmacy for appropriate management . drugs are drug class in multiple ways . one of the key divisions is by level of control , which distinguishes prescription drugs ( those that a pharmacist dispenses only on the order of a physician , physician assistant , or qualified nurse ) from over-the-counter drugs ( those that consumers can order for themselves ) . another key distinction is between traditional small molecule drugs , usually derived from chemical synthesis , and biopharmaceuticals , which include recombinant proteins , vaccines , blood products used therapy ( such as ivig ) , gene therapy , monoclonal antibody and cell therapy ( for instance , stem cell therapies ) . other ways to classify medicines are by mode of action , route of administration , biological system affected , or therapeutic effects . an elaborate and widely used classification system is the anatomical therapeutic chemical classification system ( atc system ) . the world health organization keeps a list of essential medicines . drug discovery and drug development are complex and expensive endeavors undertaken by pharmaceutical industry , academic scientists , and governments . as a result of this complex path from discovery to commercialization , partnering has become a standard practice for advancing drug candidates through development pipelines . governments generally regulate what drugs can be marketed , how drugs are marketed , and in some jurisdictions , drug pricing . controversies have arisen over drug pricing and disposal of used drugs .