stanley augustus holloway ( 1 october 1890 & nbsp ; – 30 january 1982 ) was an english stage and film actor , humourist , singer , poet and monologist . he was famous for his comic and character roles on stage and screen , especially that of alfred p . doolittle in my fair lady . he was also renowned for his comic monologues and songs , which he performed and recorded throughout most of his 70-year career . born in london , holloway pursued a career as a clerk in his teen years . he made early stage appearances before infantry service in the first world war , after which he had his first major theatre success starring in kissing time when the musical transferred to the west end from broadway . in 1921 , he joined a concert party , the co-optimists , and his career began to flourish . at first , he was employed chiefly as a singer , but his skills as an actor and reciter of comic monologues were soon recognised . characters from his monologues such as sam small , invented by holloway , and albert ramsbottom , created for him by marriott edgar , were absorbed into popular british culture , and holloway developed a following for the recordings of his many monologues . by the 1930s , he was in demand to star in variety , pantomime and musical comedy , including several revues . following the outbreak of the second world war , holloway made short propaganda films on behalf of the british film institute and pathé news and took character parts in a series of war films including major barbara , the way ahead , this happy breed and the way to the stars . after the war , he appeared in the film brief encounter and made a series of films for ealing studios , including passport to pimlico , the lavender hill mob and the titfield thunderbolt . in 1956 he was cast as the irresponsible and irrepressible alfred p . doolittle in my fair lady , a role that he played on broadway , the west end and in the my fair lady ( film ) . the role brought him international fame , and his performances earned him nominations for a tony award for best featured actor in a musical and an academy award for best supporting actor . in his later years , holloway appeared in television series in the uk and the us , toured in revues , appeared in stage plays in britain , canada , australia and the us , and continued to make films into his eighties . holloway was married twice and had five children , including the actor julian holloway .