glycogen is a multibranched polysaccharide of glucose that serves as a form of energy storage in animals , fungi , and bacteria . the polysaccharide structure represents the main storage form of glucose in the body . glycogen functions as one of two forms of energy reserves , glycogen being for short-term and the other form being triglyceride stores in adipose tissue ( i.e . , body fat ) for long-term storage . in humans , glycogen is made and stored primarily in the cells of the liver and skeletal muscle . in the liver , glycogen can make up 5–6 % of the organ 's fresh weight , and the liver of an adult , weighing 1.5 & nbsp ; kg , can store roughly 100–120 & nbsp ; grams of glycogen . in skeletal muscle , glycogen is found in a low concentration ( 1–2 % of the muscle mass ) and the skeletal muscle of an adult weighing 70 & nbsp ; kg stores roughly 400 & nbsp ; grams of glycogen . the amount of glycogen stored in the body—particularly within the muscles and liver—mostly depends on physical training , basal metabolic rate , and eating habits . small amounts of glycogen are also found in other tissues and cells , including the kidneys , red blood cells , white blood cells , and glial cells in the brain . the uterus also stores glycogen during pregnancy to nourish the embryo . approximately 4 & nbsp ; grams of glucose are present in the blood of humans at all times ; in fasting individuals , blood glucose is maintained constant at this level at the expense of glycogen stores in the liver and skeletal muscle . glycogen stores in skeletal muscle serve as a form of energy storage for the muscle itself ; however , the breakdown of muscle glycogen impedes muscle glucose uptake from the blood , thereby increasing the amount of blood glucose available for use in other tissues . liver glycogen stores serve as a store of glucose for use throughout the body , particularly the central nervous system . the human brain consumes approximately 60 % of blood glucose in fasted , sedentary individuals . glycogen is the analogue of starch , a glucose polymer that functions as energy storage in plants . it has a structure similar to amylopectin ( a component of starch ) , but is more extensively branched and compact than starch . both are white powders in their dry state . glycogen is found in the form of granules in the cytosol/cytoplasm in many cell types , and plays an important role in the glucose cycle . glycogen forms an energy reserve that can be quickly mobilized to meet a sudden need for glucose , but one that is less compact than the energy reserves of triglycerides ( lipids ) . as such it is also found as storage reserve in many parasitic protozoa .