following warhol 's death in 1987 , cale again collaborated with lou reed on the album songs for drella ( 1990 ) , a song cycle about warhol , their mentor . the album marked an end to a 22-year estrangement from reed . in his autobiography , cale revealed that he resented letting reed take charge of the songs for drella project . the longstanding friction between reed and cale contributed to the passion and lurching frustration evident in the sound of the album , as did the ambivalent relationship reed had to warhol . in 1990 , following a 20-year hiatus , the velvet underground reformed for a fondation cartier benefit show in france . he again collaborated with eno in the same year on wrong way up , a joint album characterised by an uptempo accessibility at odds with cale 's description of the fraught relationship between the pair . a year later , cale contributed one song , '' hallelujah '' , to the tribute album to leonard cohen , i 'm your fan . cale 's mid-tempo acoustic version was performed on piano , and his arrangement formed the basis of most subsequent covers of the song , which has since become a standard . leonard cohen asks for brief halt to new covers of '' hallelujah '' rolling stone . retrieved 25 november 2011 in 1992 , cale performed vocals on two songs , '' hunger '' and '' first evening '' , on french composer and producer hector zazou 's album sahara blue . all lyrics on the album were based on the poetry of arthur rimbaud . in 1994 , cale performed a spoken-word duet with suzanne vega on the song '' the long voyage '' on zazou 's album chansons des mers froides . the lyrics were based on the poem '' les silhouettes '' by oscar wilde , and cale co-wrote the music with zazou . it was later released as a single ( retitled '' the long voyages '' as it featured several remixes by zazou , mad professor and more ) . in 1996 , cale released walking on locusts which turned out to be his only solo album of the decade . the record featured appearances by talking heads ' david byrne , the soldier string quartet , and original velvet underground drummer moe tucker . cale composed an instrumental score for a ballet titled nico , performed by the scapino ballet in rotterdam in october 1997 and was released as dance music . cale has written a number of film soundtracks , often using more classically influenced instrumentation . in 1998 , cale mainly spent the year on tour with singer siouxsie sioux . in february , he was the curator of one day festival called '' with a little help from my friends '' that took place at the paradiso in amsterdam , netherlands , with the presence of the metropole orchestra . mojo , september 1998 , martin aston , p.22 the concert was shown on dutch national television and featured a song specially composed for the event and still unreleased , '' murdering mouth '' , sung in duet with siouxsie and her second band the creatures . cale and siouxsie then did a double bill tour in the us for two months from late june until mid-august , both artists collaborating on stage on several songs including a version of '' venus in furs '' . cale 's autobiography , what 's welsh for zen ? , was written in collaboration with victor bockris and published in 1999 by bloomsbury publishing .