ranavalona i ( born rabodoandrianampoinimerina ( also called ramavo ) ; c . 1778 & nbsp ; – august 16 , 1861 ) , also known as ranavalo-manjaka i , was sovereign of the kingdom of madagascar from 1828 to 1861 . after positioning herself as queen following the death of her young husband , radama i , ranavalona pursued a policy of isolationism and self-sufficiency , reducing economic and political ties with european powers , repelling a french attack on the coastal town of mahavelona , and taking vigorous measures to eradicate the small but growing christianity in madagascar initiated under radama i by members of the london missionary society . she made heavy use of the traditional practice of corvée ( forced labor as tax payment ) to complete public works projects and develop a standing army of between 20,000 and 30,000 merina soldiers , whom she deployed to pacify outlying regions of the island and further expand the realm . the combination of regular warfare , disease , difficult forced labor and harsh trial by ordeal using a poisonous nut from the tangena shrub resulted in a high mortality rate among both soldiers and civilians during her 33-year reign , with madagascar 's population reducing from 5 million in 1833 to 2.5 million in 1839 . although greatly obstructed by ranavalona 's policies , foreign political interests in madagascar remained undiminished . divisions between traditionalist and pro-european factions at the queen 's court created opportunities that european intermediaries leveraged in an attempt to hasten the succession of her son , radama ii . the young prince disagreed with many of his mother 's policies and was amenable to french proposals for the exploitation of the island 's resources , as expressed in the lambert charter he concluded with a french representative in 1855 . these plans were never successful , however , and radama ii did not take the throne until ranavalona 's death in 1861 at the age of 83 . ranavalona 's european contemporaries generally condemned her policies and characterized her as a tyrant at best and insane at worst . these negative characterizations persisted in western scholarly literature until the mid-1970s . later academic research recast ranavalona 's actions as those of a queen attempting to expand her empire while protecting malagasy sovereignty against the encroachment of european cultural and political influence .