a factory , manufacturing plant or a production plant is an industrial site , usually a complex consisting of several buildings filled with machinery , where workers manufacture items or operate machines which process each item into another . they are a critical part of modern economic production , with the majority of the world 's goods being created or processed within factories . factories arose with the introduction of machinery during the industrial revolution , when the capital and space requirements became too great for cottage industry or workshops . early factories that contained small amounts of machinery , such as one or two spinning mules , and fewer than a dozen workers have been called '' glorified workshops '' . most modern factories have large warehouses or warehouse-like facilities that contain heavy equipment used for assembly line production . large factories tend to be located with access to multiple modes of transportation , with some having rail , highway and water loading and unloading facilities . in some countries like australia , it is common to call a factory building a '' shed '' . factories may either make discrete products or some type of continuous production material , such as chemicals , pulp and paper , or refined oil products . factories manufacturing chemicals are often called plants and may have most of their equipment – tanks , pressure vessels , chemical reactors , pumps and piping – outdoors and operated from control rooms . oil refinery have most of their equipment outdoors . discrete products may be final goods , or parts and sub-assemblies which are made into final products elsewhere . factories may be supplied parts from elsewhere or make them from raw materials . continuous production industries typically use heat or electricity to transform streams of raw materials into finished products . the term mill originally referred to the gristmill , which usually used natural resources such as water or wind power until those were displaced by steam power in the 19th century . because many processes like spinning and weaving , iron rolling , and paper manufacturing were originally powered by water , the term survives as in steel mill , paper mill , etc .