sir michael murray hordern , cbe ( 3 october 19112 may 1995 ) morley , sheridan . '' hordern , michael murray ( 1911–1995 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 , online edition , may 2009 , accessed 22 july 2015 was an english stage and film actor whose career spanned nearly 60 years . he is best known for his shakespearean roles , especially that of king lear , which he played to much acclaim on stage in stratford-upon-avon in 1969 and london in 1970 . he then successfully assumed the role on television five years later . he often appeared in film , rising from a bit part actor in the late 1930s to a member of the main cast ; by the time of his death he had appeared in nearly 140 cinema roles . his later work was predominantly in television and radio . born in berkhamsted , hertfordshire , into a family with no theatrical connections , hordern was educated at windlesham house school where he became interested in drama . he went on to brighton college where his interest in the theatre developed . after leaving the college he joined an amateur dramatics company , and came to the notice of several influential shakespearean directors who cast him in minor roles in othello and macbeth . during the second world war he served on hms illustrious where he reached the rank of lieutenant commander . upon his demobilisation he resumed his acting career and made his television debut , becoming a reliable bit-part actor in many films , particularly in the war film genre . hordern came to prominence in the early 1950s when he took part in a theatrical competition at the arts theatre in london . there , he impressed glen byam shaw who secured the actor a season-long contract at the royal shakespeare theatre where he played major parts , including caliban in the tempest , jaques in as you like it , and sir politick would-be in ben jonson comedy volpone . the following season hordern joined michael benthall company at the old vic where , among other parts , he played polonius in hamlet , and the title role in king john . in 1957 he won a best actor award at that year 's british academy television awards for his role as the barrister in john mortimer courtroom drama the dock brief . along with his theatrical responsibilities hordern had regular supporting roles in various films including cleopatra ( 1963 ) , and a funny thing happened on the way to the forum ( 1966 ) . in the late 1960s hordern met the british theatre director jonathan miller , who cast him in whistle and i 'll come to you , which was recorded for television and received wide praise . hordern 's next major play was jumpers which appeared at the royal national theatre at the start of 1972 . his performance was praised by critics and he reprised the role four years later . his television commitments increased towards the end of his life . his credits include paradise postponed , the bafta award-winning memento mori , and the bbc adaptation of middlemarch . he was appointed a cbe in 1972 and was knighted eleven years later . hordern suffered from kidney disease during the 1990s and died from it in 1995 at the age of 83 .