for much of season six , kenny remained dead , though he still appears to possess cartman 's body , and both stone and parker entertained the idea of eventually bringing the character back . according to stone , only a small minority of fans were significantly angered by kenny 's absence to threaten a boycott of the cable channel comedy central , on which south park is aired . for most of the season , stan , kyle , and cartman fill the void left by kenny by allowing the characters butters stotch and tweek tweak into their group , paving the way for those characters to receive more focus on the show ; nevertheless , kenny returned from the year-long absence in the season six finale '' red sleigh down '' , has remained a main character since , and has been given larger roles in episodes . semigram , aly . '' 'south park ' tries to go for laughs with the penn state scandal '' . entertainment weekly . november 17 , 2011 his character no longer dies in every episode , and has only been killed occasionally in the seasons following his return . the most famous example of this came from '' the ring , '' where kenny dies of syphilis after removing his purity ring in protest of the jonas brothers , or when , as his super-hero alter ego mysterion , he pleads with the others to watch him return after killing himself . the first explanation given for kenny 's deaths and reappearances was given in '' cartman joins nambla '' , wherein the mccormicks have a baby exactly like kenny , including the characteristic orange parka , shortly after the former kenny dies . mr . mccormick exclaims , '' god , this must be the fiftieth time this has happened '' , to which mrs . mccormick quickly replies , '' fifty-second '' . this explanation is expanded upon in the season 14 episodes '' coon 2 : hindsight '' , '' mysterion rises '' and '' coon vs . coon and friends '' , in which kenny , while playing superheroes with his friends , claims his '' super power '' is immortality . he actually dies several times during these episodes—even committing suicide more than once—reawakening alive and unharmed in his bed each time . he is frustrated and angry that no one can remember him dying every time he regenerates , and longs to know the source of his power , which he views as a curse . unbeknownst to him , his parents were previously connected to a cthulhu-worshipping death cult . after kenny shoots himself the second time , mrs . mccormick awakes with a scream , shrieks '' it 's happening again ! '' , and minutes later , is shown gently placing a newborn kenny in his bed . '' we should never have gone to that stupid cult meeting , '' she grouses as she and her husband return to bed . in '' put it down '' , he is killed off-screen by a driver on his phone , as his picture is shown among those of kids killed by driver on phone texting tribute . in '' bike parade '' , jeff bezos tells alexa to kill kenny , and cartman hauls his coffin while riding his bike in the parade . '' the pandemic special '' sees kenny being gunned down by the police when they are equipped with military weaponry to deal with the children breaking free from covid-19 quarantine . kenny has died 126 times in the south park franchise ( 98 in the series , 12 in the shorts , 14 in the video games , twice in the movie , and once in the season 7-11 intro ) .