hiram warren johnson ( september 2 , 1866august 6 , 1945 ) was an american attorney and politician from california who achieved national prominence in the early 20th century . he served as the 23rd governor of california from 1911 to 1917 and represented california in the u.s . senate for five terms from 1917 until his death in 1945 . as governor , johnson was a leading american progressive and ran for vice president on theodore roosevelt 's progressive ticket in the 1912 presidential election . as senator , johnson became a leading liberal isolationism , among those '' irreconcilables '' who opposed the treaty of versailles and rejected the league of nations . later , johnson was also a vocal opponent of the united nations charter . after working as a stenographer and reporter , johnson embarked on a legal career . he began his practice in his hometown of sacramento , california , but moved to san francisco , where he worked as an assistant district attorney . gaining statewide renown for his prosecutions of public corruption , johnson won the 1910 california gubernatorial election with the backing of the lincoln–roosevelt league . he instituted several progressive reforms , establishing a railroad commission and introducing aspects of direct democracy such as the power to recall state officials . having joined with roosevelt and other progressives to form the progressive party , johnson won the party 's 1912 vice-presidential nomination . in one of the best third-party performances in u.s . history , the ticket finished second nationally in the popular and electoral vote . johnson won election to the senate in 1916 , becoming a leader of the chamber 's progressive republicans . he made his biggest mark in the senate as an early voice for isolationism , opposing u.s . entry into world war i and u.s . participation in the league of nations . after world war i , he helped enact the immigration act of 1924 , which severely restricted immigration from east asian countries , southern europe , and eastern europe through the use of racial quotas . he unsuccessfully sought the republican presidential nomination in 1920 and 1924 and supported democratic nominee franklin d . roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election . while johnson initially supported many of roosevelt 's new deal programs , he became more hostile to fdr after the latter was re-elected in 1936 . he remained in the senate until his death in 1945 .