islamic economics is a term used to refer to islamic commercial jurisprudence , muamalat ) , and also to an ideology of economics based on the teachings of islam that takes a middle ground between the systems of marxism and capitalism , mostly similar to the labour theory of value , which is '' labour-based exchange and exchange-based labour '' . islamic commercial jurisprudence entails the rules of transacting finance or other economic activity in a shari ' a compliant manner , i.e . , a manner conforming to islamic scripture ( quran and sunnah ) . islamic jurisprudence ( fiqh ) has traditionally dealt with determining what is required , prohibited , encouraged , discouraged , or just permissible , according to the revealed word of god ( quran ) and the religious practices established by muhammad ( sunnah ) . this applied to issues like property , money , employment , taxes , loans , along with everything else . the social science of economics , on the other hand , works to describe , analyse and understand production , distribution , and consumption of goods and services , and studied how to best achieve policy goals , such as full employment , price stability , economic equity and productivity growth . early forms of mercantilism and capitalism are thought to have been developed in the islamic golden age maya shatzmiller ( 1994 ) , labor in the medieval islamic world , pp . 402–03 , brill publishers , . from the 9th century and later became dominant in european muslim territories like al-andalus and the emirate of sicily . the islamic economic concepts taken and applied by the states age of the islamic gunpowders and various islamic kingdoms and sultanates led to systemic changes in their economy . particularly in the mughal india , its wealthiest region of bengal , a major trading nation of the medieval world , signaled the period of proto-industrialization , making direct contribution to the world 's first industrial revolution after the battle of plassey . in the mid-twentieth century , campaigns began promoting the idea of specifically islamic patterns of economic thought and behavior . by the 1970s , '' islamic economics '' was introduced as an academic discipline in a number of institutions of higher learning throughout the muslim world and in the west . the central features of an islamic economy are often summarized as : ( 1 ) the '' behavioral norms and moral foundations '' derived from the quran and sunnah ; ( 2 ) collection of zakat and other islamic taxes , ( 3 ) prohibition of interest ( riba ) charged on loans . quran ( al-baqarah 2:275 ) , ( al-baqarah 2:276–80 ) , ( al-'imran 3:130 ) , ( al-nisa 4:161 ) , ( ar-rum 30:39 ) financial regulation in crisis ? : the role of law and the failure of northern rock by joanna gray , orkun akseli p . 97 advocates of islamic economics generally describe it as neither socialism nor capitalism , but as a '' third way '' , an ideal mean with none of the drawbacks of the other two systems . islam and economic justice : a 'third way ' between capitalism and socialism ? how do we know islam will solve the problems of poverty and inequality ? among the claims made for an islamic economic system by islamic activists and revivalists are that the economic inequality will be reduced and prosperity enhanced quran 4:29 international business success in a strange cultural environment by mamarinta p . mababaya p . 203 by such means as the discouraging of the hoarding of wealth , quran 9:35 al-bukhari vol 2 hadith 514 taxing wealth ( through zakat ) but not trade , exposing lenders to risk through profit sharing and venture capital , ibn majah vol 3 hadith 2289 international business success in a strange cultural environment by mamarinta p . mababaya p . 202 islamic capital markets : theory and practice by noureddine krichene p . 119 discouraging of hoarding of food speculation , abu daud hadith 2015 ibn majah vold 3 hadith 2154 the stability of islamic finance : creating a resilient financial environment by zamir iqbal , abbas mirakhor , noureddine krichenne , hossein askari p . 75 and other activities that islam regards as sinful such as unlawful confiscation of land . al-bukhari vol 3 hadith 632 ; vol 4 hadith 419 al-bukhari vol 3 hadith 634 ; vol 4 hadith 418 however , critics like timur kuran have described it as primarily a '' vehicle for asserting the primacy of islam '' , with economic reform being a secondary motive . tkiam2004 : p.5 fkibp2015 : p.88