the f . w . woolworth company ( often referred to as woolworth 's or woolworth ) was a retail company and one of the original pioneers of the five and dime . it was among the most successful american and international five-and-dime businesses , setting trends and creating the modern retail model that stores follow worldwide today . the first woolworth store was opened by frank winfield woolworth on february 22 , 1879 , as woolworth 's great five cent store '' in utica , new york . though it initially appeared to be successful , the store soon failed . when woolworth searched for a new location , a friend suggested lancaster , pennsylvania . using the sign from the utica store , woolworth opened his first successful '' woolworth 's great five cent store '' on july 18 , 1879 , in lancaster . he brought his brother , charles sumner woolworth , into the business . the two woolworth brothers pioneered and developed merchandising , direct purchasing , sales , and customer service practices commonly used today . despite its growing to be one of the largest retail chains in the world through most of the 20th century , increased competition led to its decline beginning in the 1980s , while its sporting goods division grew . the chain went out of business in july 1997 , when the company decided to focus primarily on sporting goods and renamed itself venator group . by 2001 , the company focused exclusively on the sporting goods market , changing its name to the current foot locker , changing its ticker symbol from its familiar z in 2003 to its present ticker . retail chains using the woolworth name survived in austria , germany , mexico and united kingdom as of early 2009 . the similarly named woolworths supermarkets in australia and new zealand are operated by australia 's largest retail company , woolworths group , a separate company with no historical links to the f . w . woolworth company or foot locker , inc . however , woolworths limited did take their name from the original company , as it had not been registered or trademarked in australia at the time . similarly , in south africa , woolworths holdings limited operates a marks & spencer-like store and uses the woolworth name , but has never had any connection with the american company . the property development company woolworth group in cyprus began life as an offshoot of the british woolworth 's company , originally operating woolworth 's department stores in cyprus . in 2003 , these stores were rebranded debenhams , but the commercial property arm of the business retained the woolworth 's name .