outer space is the expanse that exists beyond earth and between celestial bodies . outer space is not completely empty—it is a hard vacuum containing a low density of particles , predominantly a plasma of hydrogen and helium , as well as electromagnetic radiation , magnetic fields , neutrinos , dust , and cosmic rays . the baseline temperature of outer space , as set by the background radiation from the big bang , is . the plasma between galaxies accounts for about half of the baryonic matter in the universe ; it has a number density of less than one hydrogen atom per cubic metre and a temperature of millions of kelvins . local concentrations of matter have condensed into stars and galaxy . studies indicate that 90 % of the mass in most galaxies is in an unknown form , called dark matter , which interacts with other matter through gravitational but not electromagnetic forces . observations suggest that the majority of the mass-energy in the observable universe is dark energy , a type of vacuum energy that is poorly understood . intergalactic space takes up most of the volume of the universe , but even galaxies and star systems consist almost entirely of empty space . outer space does not begin at a definite altitude above the earth 's surface . the kármán line , an altitude of above sea level , is conventionally used as the start of outer space in space treaties and for aerospace records keeping . the framework for international space law was established by the outer space treaty , which entered into force on 10 october 1967 . this treaty precludes any claims of national sovereignty and permits all states to freely space exploration . despite the drafting of un resolutions for the peaceful uses of outer space , anti-satellite weapons have been tested in earth orbit . humans began the physical exploration of space during the 20th century with the advent of high-altitude balloon flights . this was followed by crewed rocket launchs and , then , crewed earth orbit , first achieved by yuri gagarin of the soviet union in 1961 . due to the high cost of getting into space , human spaceflight has been limited to low earth orbit and the moon . on the other hand , uncrewed spacecraft have reached all of the known planets in the solar system . outer space represents a challenging environment for human exploration because of the hazards of vacuum and radiation . microgravity also has a negative effect on human physiology that causes both muscle atrophy and bone loss . in addition to these health and environmental issues , the economic cost of putting objects , including humans , into space is very high .