robert franklin stroud ( january 28 , 1890 & ndash ; november 21 , 1963 ) , known as the '' birdman of alcatraz '' , was a convicted murderer , american federal prisoner and author who has been cited as one of the most notorious criminals in the united states . during his time at leavenworth penitentiary , he reared and sold birds and became a respected ornithology , although regulations did not allow him to keep birds at alcatraz , where he was incarcerated from 1942 to 1959 . stroud was never released from the federal prison system ; he was imprisoned from 1909 to his death in 1963 . born in seattle , washington , stroud ran away from his abusive father at the age of 13 , and by the time he was 18 , he had become a pimp in the alaska territory . in january 1909 , he shot and killed a bartender who attacked his mistress , a crime for which he was sentenced to 12 years in the federal prison on mcneil island in puget sound . stroud gained a reputation as a dangerous inmate who frequently had confrontations with fellow inmates and staff , and in 1916 , he stabbed and killed a guard . stroud was convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to hang , but after several trials his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment in solitary confinement . in 1920 , while in solitary confinement at leavenworth , stroud discovered a nest with three injured sparrows in the prison yard . he cared for them and within a few years had acquired a collection of about 300 canaries . he began extensive research into birds after being granted equipment by a prison-reforming warden . stroud wrote diseases of canaries , which was smuggled out of leavenworth and published in 1933 , as well as a later edition ( 1943 ) . he made important contributions to avian pathology , most notably a cure for the hemorrhagic sepsis family of diseases , gaining much respect and some level of sympathy among ornithologists and farmers . stroud ran a successful business from inside prison , but his activities infuriated the prison staff , and he was eventually transferred to alcatraz in 1942 after it was discovered that stroud had been secretly making alcohol using some of the equipment in his cell . stroud began serving a 17-year term at alcatraz federal penitentiary on december 19 , 1942 , and became inmate 594 . in 1943 , he was assessed by psychiatry romney m . ritchey , who diagnosed him as a psychopath , with an i.q . of 112 . stripped of his birds and equipment , he wrote a history of the penal system . for all the negativity written about robert stroud and his behavior , in what came to be called battle of alcatraz in may 1946 , he made efforts to end the battle . then fifty-six years old , stroud climbed over the third tier railing and lowered himself to the second tier , then dropped onto the floor of d block . in what seemed to be a valiant move , he started closing the front solid steel doors of the six isolation cells to protect the helpless men . stroud yelled to the warden , explaining that there were no firearms in d block and that those involved had retreated to another section of the prison . he made it clear that many innocent men would die if they continued to barrage them with gunfire . in 1959 , stroud was transferred to the medical center for federal prisoners in springfield , missouri , where he remained until his death on november 21 , 1963 .