agricultural policy describes a set of laws relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products . governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets . agricultural policies use predetermined goals , objectives and pathways set by an individual or government for the purpose of achieving a specified outcome , for the benefit of the individual ( s ) , society and the nations ’ economy at large . akarowhe ( 2018 ) . retooling agricultural policies and programmes for sustainable development in nigeria current investigations in agriculture and current research 2 ( 1 ) :165-168 doi : 10.32474/ciacr.2018.02.000129 agricultural policies take into consideration the primary , secondary and tertiary processes in agricultural production . outcomes can involve , for example , a guaranteed supply level , price stability , product quality , product selection , land use or employment . climate change and agriculture , estimated to be contributing 20–25 % of global annual emissions as of 2010 . blanco , g . , et al . , section 5.3.5.4 : agriculture , forestry , other land use , in : chapter 5 : drivers , trends and mitigation ( archived 30 december 2014 ) , in : emissions aggregated using 100-year global warming potentials from the ipcc second assessment report moreover , agriculture is highly vulnerable to the negative impacts of climate change , such as water scarcity , geophysical processes such as sea level rise and extreme weather , and climate change and poverty . in order for global climate change mitigation and adaptation to be effective a wide range of policies need to be implemented to reduce the risk of negative climate change impacts on agriculture porter , j.r . , et al . , section 7.5 : adaptation and managing risks in agriculture and other food system activities , in chapter 7 : food security and food production systems ( archived 5 november 2014 ) , in oppenheimer , m . , et al . , section 19.7 . assessment of response strategies to manage risks , in : chapter 19 : emergent risks and key vulnerabilities ( archived 5 november 2014 ) , in and greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture sector . summary and recommendations , in : current climate change policies are described in and smith , p . , et al . , executive summary , in : chapter 5 : drivers , trends and mitigation ( archived 30 december 2014 ) , in :