the penny-farthing , also known as a high wheel , high wheeler or ordinary , was the first machine to be called a '' bicycle '' . it was popular in the 1870s and 1880s , with its large front wheel providing high speeds ( owing to it travelling a large distance for every rotation of the legs ) and comfort ( the large wheel provides greater shock absorption ) . it became obsolete from the late 1880s with the development of modern bicycles , which provided similar speed amplification via chain drive gear trains and comfort through pneumatic tires , and were marketed in comparison to penny-farthings as '' safety bicycles '' because of the reduced danger of falling and the reduced height to fall from . the name came from the british penny and farthing coins , the former being much larger than the latter , so that the side view resembles a larger penny leading a smaller farthing . although the name '' penny-farthing '' is now the most common , it was probably not used until the machines were nearly outdated ; the first recorded print reference is from 1891 in bicycling news . for most of their reign , they were simply known as '' bicycles '' . in the late 1890s , the name '' ordinary '' began to be used , to distinguish them from the emerging safety bicycles ; this term and '' hi-wheel '' ( and variants ) are preferred by many modern enthusiasts . following the popularity of the boneshaker , eugène meyer , a frenchman , invented the high-wheeler bicycle design in 1869 and fashioned the wire-spoke tension wheel . around 1870 english inventor james starley , described as the father of the bicycle industry , and others , began producing bicycles based on the french boneshaker but with front wheels of increasing size , because larger front wheels , up to in diameter , enabled higher speeds on bicycles limited to direct drive . in 1878 , albert pope began manufacturing the columbia bicycle outside boston , starting their two-decade heyday in america . although the trend was short-lived , the penny-farthing became a symbol of the late victorian era . its popularity also coincided with the birth of cycling as a sport .