the company rates borrowers on a scale from aaa to d . intermediate ratings are offered at each level between aa and ccc ( such as bbb+ , bbb , and bbb− ) . for some borrowers , the company may also offer guidance ( termed a '' credit watch '' ) as to whether it is likely to be upgraded ( positive ) , downgraded ( negative ) or uncertain ( neutral ) . investment grade aaa : an obligor rated 'aaa ' has extremely strong capacity to meet its financial commitments . 'aaa ' is the highest issuer credit rating assigned by standard & poor 's . aa : an obligor rated 'aa ' has very strong capacity to meet its financial commitments . it differs from the highest-rated obligors only to a small degree . includes : aa+ : equivalent to moody 's aa1 ( high quality , with very low credit risk , but susceptibility to long-term risks appears somewhat greater ) aa : equivalent to aa2 aa− : equivalent to aa3 a : an obligor rated ' a ' has strong capacity to meet its financial commitments but is somewhat more susceptible to the adverse effects of changes in circumstances and economic conditions than obligors in higher-rated categories . a+ : equivalent to a1 a : equivalent to a2 bbb : an obligor rated 'bbb ' has adequate capacity to meet its financial commitments . however , adverse economic conditions or changing circumstances are more likely to lead to a weakened capacity of the obligor to meet its financial commitments . non-investment grade ( also known as speculative-grade ) bb : an obligor rated 'bb ' is less vulnerable in the near term than other lower-rated obligors . however , it faces major ongoing uncertainties and exposure to adverse business , financial , or economic conditions , which could lead to the obligor 's inadequate capacity to meet its financial commitments . b : an obligor rated ' b ' is more vulnerable than the obligors rated 'bb ' , but the obligor currently has the capacity to meet its financial commitments . adverse business , financial , or economic conditions will likely impair the obligor 's capacity or willingness to meet its financial commitments . ccc : an obligor rated 'ccc ' is currently vulnerable , and is dependent upon favorable business , financial , and economic conditions to meet its financial commitments . cc : an obligor rated 'cc ' is currently highly vulnerable . c : highly vulnerable , perhaps in bankruptcy or in arrears but still continuing to pay out on obligations r : an obligor rated ' r ' is under regulatory supervision owing to its financial condition . during the pendency of the regulatory supervision , the regulators may have the power to favor one class of obligations over others or pay some obligations and not others . sd : has selectively defaulted on some obligations d : has defaulted on obligations and s & p believes that it will generally default on most or all obligations nr : not rated