modernity , a topic in the humanities and social sciences , is both a historical period ( the modern era ) and the ensemble of particular socio-cultural norms , attitudes and practices that arose in the wake of the renaissancein the '' age of reason '' of 17th-century thought and the 18th-century '' enlightenment '' . some commentators consider the era of modernity to have ended by 1930 , with world war ii in 1945 , or the 1980s or 1990s ; the following era is called postmodernity . the term '' contemporary history '' is also used to refer to the post-1945 timeframe , without assigning it to either the modern or postmodern era . ( thus '' modern '' may be used as a name of a particular era in the past , as opposed to meaning '' the current era '' . ) depending on the field , '' modernity '' may refer to different time periods or qualities . in historiography , the 17th and 18th centuries are usually described as early modern , while the long 19th century corresponds to '' modern history '' proper . while it includes a wide range of interrelated historical processes and cultural phenomena ( from fashion to modern warfare ) , it can also refer to the subjective or existential experience of the conditions they produce , and their ongoing impact on human culture , institutions , and politics . as an analytical concept and normative idea , modernity is closely linked to the ethos of philosophical and aesthetic modernism ; political and intellectual currents that intersect with the enlightenment ; and subsequent developments such as existentialism , modern art , the formal establishment of social science , and contemporaneous antithetical developments such as marxism . it also encompasses the social relations associated with the rise of capitalism , and shifts in attitudes associated with secularization , liberalization , modernization and post-industrial life . by the late 19th and 20th centuries , modernist art , politics , science and culture has come to dominate not only western europe and north america , but almost every civilized area on the globe , including movements thought of as opposed to the west and globalization . the modern era is closely associated with the development of individualism , capitalism , urbanization and a belief in the possibilities of technological and political progress . wars and other perceived problems of this era , many of which come from the effects of rapid change , and the connected loss of strength of traditional religious and ethical norms , have led to many reactions against modern development . marx , durkheim , weber : formations of modern social thought by kenneth l . morrison . p . 294 . william schweiker , the blackwell companion to religious ethics . 2005 . p . 454 . ( cf . , '' in modernity , however , much of economic activity and theory seemed to be entirely cut off from religious and ethical norms , at least in traditional terms . many see modern economic developments as entirely secular . '' ) optimism and belief in constant progress has been most recently criticized by postmodernism while the dominance of western europe and anglo-america over other continents has been criticized by postcolonialism . in michel foucault 's view classified as a proponent of postmodernism though he himself rejected the '' postmodernism '' label , considering his work as '' a critical history of modernity '' , '' modernity '' as a historical category is marked by developments such as a questioning or rejection of tradition ; the prioritization of individualism , freedom and formal equality ; faith in inevitable social , scientific and technological progress , rationalization and professionalization , a movement from feudalism ( or agrarianism ) toward capitalism and the market economy , industrialization , urbanization and secularisation , the development of the nation-state , representative democracy , public education ( etc . ) . in the context of art history , '' modernity '' ( modernité ) has a more limited sense , '' modern art '' covering the period of & nbsp ; 1860–1970 . use of the term in this sense is attributed to charles baudelaire , who in his 1864 essay '' the painter of modern life '' , designated the '' fleeting , ephemeral experience of life in an urban metropolis '' , and the responsibility art has to capture that experience . in this sense , the term refers to '' a particular relationship to time , one characterized by intense historical discontinuity or rupture , openness to the novelty of the future , and a heightened sensitivity to what is unique about the present '' .