an agape feast or lovefeast ( also spelled love feast or love-feast , sometimes capitalized ) is a communal meal shared among christians . the name comes from agape , a greek term for 'love ' in its broadest sense . the plural agapae or agapæ has been used by itself in reference to lovefeasts , but is ambiguous , as it can also mean funerary gatherings . the lovefeast custom originated in the early church and was a time of fellowship for believers . the eucharist was often a part of the lovefeast , although at some point ( probably between the latter part of the 1st century ad and 250 ad ) , the two became separate . thus , in modern times the lovefeast refers to a christian ritual meal distinct from the lord 's supper . the lovefeast seeks to strengthen the bonds and the spirit of harmony , goodwill , and congeniality , as well as to forgive past disputes and instead love one another . the practice of the lovefeast is mentioned in of the christian bible and was a '' common meal of the early church '' . references to communal meals are discerned in , in saint ignatius of antioch 's letter to the smyrnaeans , where the term agape is used , and in a letter from pliny the younger to trajan , ( ca . 111 a.d . ) in which he reported that the christians , after having met '' on a stated day '' in the early morning to '' address a form of prayer to christ , as to a divinity '' , later in the day would '' reassemble , to eat in common a harmless meal '' . similar communal meals are attested also in the apostolic tradition often attributed to hippolytus of rome , who does not use the term agape , and in works of tertullian , who does . the connection between such substantial meals and the eucharist had virtually ceased by the time of cyprian ( died 258 ) , when the eucharist was celebrated with fasting in the morning and the agape in the evening . the synod of gangra in 340 makes mention of lovefeasts in relation to a heretic who had barred his followers from attending them . though still mentioned in the quinisext council of 692 , the agape fell into disuse soon after , except among the churches in ethiopia and india . at the end of the 18th century the carmelites paolino da san bartolomeo reported that the ancient saint thomas christians of india still celebrated the lovefeast , using their typical dish called appam . in addition , radical pietism groups originating in the eighteenth-century , such as the schwarzenau brethren and the moravian church , celebrate the lovefeast . methodist church also continue the practice . the practice has been revived more recently among other groups , including anglicans , as well as the american house church movement . the modern lovefeast has often been used in ecumenical settings , such as between methodists and anglicans .