trans australia airlines ( taa ) , renamed australian airlines in 1986 , was one of the two major australian domestic airlines between its inception in 1946 and its merger with qantas in september 1992 . as a result of the '' cobra '' ( or common branding ) project , the entire airline was rebranded qantas about a year later with tickets stating in small print '' australian airlines limited trading as qantas airways limited '' until the adoption of a single air operator certificate a few years later . at that point , the entire airline was officially renamed '' qantas airways limited '' continuing the name and livery of the parent company with the only change being the change of by-line from '' the spirit of australia '' to '' the australian airline '' under the window line with the existing '' qantas '' title appearing above . during its period as taa , the company played a major part in the development of the australian domestic air transport industry . the establishment of taa broke the domestic air transport monopoly of australian national airways ( ana ) in the late 1940s , and taking over the queensland air network from qantas . it was also at the time taa supported the flying doctor services of australia by providing aircraft , pilots and engineers to ensure every emergency was answered quickly . qantas had also been instrumental in the formation of the flying doctor service . the airline 's headquarters were located in melbourne . '' world airline directory . '' flight international . 27 march-2 april 1991 . 71 . '' suburbs & postcodes . '' city of melbourne . retrieved on 5 april 2010 . in 1954 taa became the first airline outside europe to introduce the vickers viscount , and in 1981 it introduced the airbus a300 , the first wide-body aircraft to be purchased by an australian domestic airline providing taa with a clear edge over a major competitor at the time , ansett which had purchased instead , the boeing 767-200 , receiving the type approximately a year later . ironically , although the a300s were initially painted in full qantas livery , they were phased out within a few years being replaced by previously international operated qantas 767-238ers , 767-338ers and later supplemented by seven ex british airways 767-336ers . qantas revived the australian airlines brand between 2002 and 2006 to serve the low-cost leisure market of visitors to and from australia but using a full-service model , operating selected qantas 767-338ers – although the livery used was not the same as that used by the previous domestic operation .