sir arthur william fadden , ( 13 april 189421 april 1973 ) was an australian politician who served as prime minister of australia from 29 august to 7 october 1941 . he was the leader of the country party from 1940 to 1958 . fadden was born in ingham , queensland , to irish immigrant parents . he was raised in walkerston , and left school at the age of 15 . he was appointed town clerk of mackay in 1916 , but following the 1918 cyclone moved to townsville and opened an accountancy firm . he was elected to the city of townsville in 1930 , and in 1932 was elected to the queensland legislative assembly for the country and progressive national party . fadden lost his seat in 1935 , but the following year won a by-election to the federal division of darling downs . in march 1940 , fadden was named a minister without portfolio in the government of robert menzies , who led the united australia party in a coalition with the country party . a few months later , following the deaths of three senior ministers in an air crash , he took over as minister for air and minister for civil aviation . in october 1940 , fadden replaced harold thorby as deputy leader of the country party . the leadership was vacant at the time , following archie cameron 's resignation , so fadden became acting leader of the party and de facto deputy prime minister . menzies subsequently promoted him to treasurer of australia . fadden served as acting prime minister for four months early in 1941 ( while menzies was away in europe ) , and became popular for his conciliatory manner . he became the official leader of the country party following a ballot in march 1941 . in august 1941 , menzies resigned as prime minister after losing the confidence of his ministry . fadden was elected leader of the uap–country coalition in his place , and consequently became prime minister . however , he held office for just 39 days before being replaced by john curtin , whose labor party had successfully moved a motion of no confidence . after losing the prime ministership , fadden continued on as leader of the opposition for two more years . he eventually resigned in favour of menzies following the coalition 's massive defeat at the 1943 election . when menzies returned as prime minister in 1949 , fadden became treasurer for a second time , holding office until his retirement from politics in 1958 . only peter costello has served in the position for longer . fadden enjoyed one of the most rapid rises in australian political history , moving from private citizen to the prime ministership in just 11 years . he was the first prime minister born in queensland , and the first and only member of the country party to become prime minister with his own mandate ( rather than just serving as a caretaker after the death of a predecessor ) .