the british government is directed by the cabinet , a group of senior government ministers led by the prime minister . most of the day-to-day work of the cabinet is carried out by cabinet committees , rather than by the full cabinet . each committee has its own area of responsibility , and their decisions are binding on the entire cabinet . the cabinet manual : a guide to laws , conventions and rules on the operation of government ( cabinet office , october 2011 ) the details of the committee structure and membership are at the discretion of the prime minister . the prime minister is free to reorganize committees and their responsibilities however he or she wishes , and can appoint or dismiss members freely . the sole limitation is the requirement that cabinet ministers must be sworn members of the privy council , since the cabinet itself is a sub committee of the privy council . although there have been many changes since the cabinet committee system was first developed in the early twentieth century , the committees for foreign and military policy , domestic policy , economic policy , and the government 's legislative agenda have been more or less permanent fixtures . these and many other committees are standing committees , which have a broad remit ; others are ad hoc committees , which are established to deal with specific matters . ad hoc committees are rarer now than throughout most of the twentieth century . many matters are now expected to be resolved bilaterally between departments , or through more informal discussion , rather than requiring the formation of a committee . the 2015 government introduced '' implementation taskforces '' to address specific cross-cutting priorities . these are to report to the prime minister and cabinet , and cabinet approval is still required if collective agreement is needed . when the prime minister is unable to attend cabinet or the chair and any deputy chair of a cabinet committee are absent , the next most senior minister in the ministerial ranking should take the chair . the cabinet manual 2011 , p . 35 .