barely a year later , on 1 september 1853 and with his wife pregnant for a fifth time , hodgson died suddenly of a stroke , leaving the family without an income . frances was cared for by her grandmother while her mother took over running the family business . from her grandmother , who bought her books , frances learned to love reading , in particular her first book , the flower book , which had colored illustrations and poems . because of their reduced income , eliza had to give up their family home and moved with her children to live with relatives in seedley grove , tanners lane , pendleton , salford , where they lived in a house with a large enclosed garden in which frances enjoyed playing . for a year frances went to a small dame school run by two women , where she first saw a book about fairies . when her mother moved the family to islington square , salford , frances mourned the lack of flowers and gardens . their new home was located in a gated square of faded gentility adjacent to an area with severe overcrowding and poverty that '' defied description '' , according to friedrich engels , who lived in manchester at the time . frances had an active imagination , writing stories she made up in old notebooks . one of her favorite books was harriet beecher stowe 's novel uncle tom 's cabin , and she spent many hours acting out scenes from the story . robin bernstein , racial innocence : performing american childhood from slavery to civil rights , ( new york : new york university press , 2011 ) , 69–71 . see also robin bernstein , children 's books , dolls , and the performance of race ; or , the possibility of children 's literature , pmla 126.1 : 160–169 . frances and her siblings were sent to be educated at the select seminary for young ladies and gentlemen , where she was described as '' precocious '' and '' romantic '' . she had an active social life and enjoyed telling stories to her friends and cousins ; in her mother , she found a good audience , although her brothers tended to tease her about her stories . frances continued her education at the select seminary until she was aged fifteen . manchester was almost entirely dependent on a cotton economy that was ruined by the lancashire cotton famine brought about by the american civil war . in 1863 , eliza hodgson was forced to sell their business and move the family once again to an even smaller home ; at that time frances ' limited education came to an end . eliza 's brother ( frances 's uncle ) , william boond , asked the family to join him in knoxville , tennessee , where he now had a thriving dry goods store . within the year eliza decided to accept his offer and move the family from manchester . she sold their possessions and told frances to burn her early writings in the fire . in 1865 , the family emigrated to the united states and settled near knoxville . jack neely , '' frances hodgson burnett , the knoxville years , '' knoxville mercury , 18 november 2015 .