universal plug and play ( upnp ) is a set of networking protocols that permits networked devices , such as personal computers , printers , internet gateways , wi-fi access points and mobile devices to seamlessly discover each other 's presence on the network and establish functional network services for data sharing , communications , and entertainment . upnp is intended primarily for residential networks without enterprise-class devices . the upnp protocols were promoted by the upnp forum , a computer industry initiative to enable simple and robust connectivity to stand-alone devices and personal computers from many different vendors . the forum consisted of more than eight hundred vendors involved in everything from consumer electronics to network computing . since 2016 , all upnp efforts have been managed by the open connectivity foundation ( ocf ) . upnp assumes the network runs internet protocol ( ip ) and then leverages http , on top of ip , in order to provide device/service description , actions , data transfer and eventing . device search requests and advertisements are supported by running http on top of udp ( port 1900 ) using multicast ( known as httpmu ) . responses to search requests are also sent over udp , but are instead sent using unicast ( known as httpu ) . conceptually , upnp extends plug and play—a technology for dynamically attaching devices directly to a computer—to zero configuration networking for residential and soho wireless networks . upnp devices are '' plug and play '' in that , when connected to a network , they automatically establish working configurations with other devices . upnp is generally regarded as unsuitable for deployment in business settings for reasons of economy , complexity , and consistency : the multicast foundation makes it chatty , consuming too many network resources on networks with a large population of devices ; the simplified access controls do n't map well to complex environments ; and it does not provide a uniform configuration syntax such as the cli environments of cisco ios or junos .