ranulf flambard ( c . 1060 & nbsp ; – 5 september 1128 ) was a medieval norman bishop of durham and an influential government minister of king william rufus of england . ranulf was the son of a priest of bayeux , normandy , and his nickname flambard means incendiary or torch-bearer , and may have referred to his personality . he started his career under king william i of england , probably in the compilation of the domesday book , as well as being the keeper of the king 's seal . on the death of william i , ranulf chose to serve the new king of england , william rufus . under rufus , he continued to hold the king 's seal , and also became involved in the financial administration of the kingdom , where he quickly made a name for himself by his novel methods of raising revenue . he was given custody of a number of vacant ecclesiastical offices , administering at one point sixteen vacant bishoprics or abbeys . his many duties have led to him being considered the first justiciar of england . during rufus 's reign , ranulf supervised the construction of the first stone bridge in london and oversaw the construction of the king 's hall at westminster . in 1099 he was rewarded with the bishopric of durham . on the death of rufus in 1100 , ranulf was imprisoned in the tower of london by rufus ' successor henry i of england . ranulf was a convenient scapegoat for the financial extortions of rufus 's reign . he became the first prisoner to escape from the tower and went into exile in normandy with rufus 's and henry 's older brother robert curthose , the duke of normandy . ranulf became a leading advisor to robert , and assisted in his unsuccessful invasion of england , an attempt to oust henry from the throne . the brothers reconciled , but although ranulf was restored to office he spent the next few years in normandy , returning only after henry had defeated robert at the battle of tinchebray . ranulf subsequently retired from political life , with only occasional appearances in public . he remained active in ecclesiastical affairs , attending councils and working to defend the rights of his see .