jealousy generally refers to the thoughts or feelings of insecurity , fear , and concern over a relative lack of possessions or safety . jealousy can consist of one or more emotions such as anger , resentment , inadequacy , helplessness or disgust . in its original meaning , jealousy is distinct from envy , though the two terms have popularly become synonymous in the english language , with jealousy now also taking on the definition originally used for envy alone . jealousy is a typical experience in human relationships , and it has been observed in infants as young as five months . draghi-lorenz , r . ( 2000 ) . five-month-old infants can be jealous : against cognitivist solipsism . paper presented in a symposium convened for the xiith biennial international conference on infant studies ( icis ) , 16–19 july , brighton . some researchers claim that jealousy is seen in all cultures and is a universal trait . buss , d.m . ( 2000 ) . the dangerous passion : why jealousy is as necessary as love and sex . new york : free press . white , g.l . , & mullen , p.e . ( 1989 ) . jealousy : theory , research , and clinical practice . new york , ny : guilford press . however , others claim jealousy is a culture-specific emotion . jealousy can either be suspicious or reactive , rydell rj , bringle rg differentiating reactive and suspicious jealousy social behavior and personality an international journal 35 ( 8 ) :1099-1114 jan 2007 and it is often reinforced as a series of particularly strong emotions and constructed as a universal human experience . psychologists have proposed several models to study the processes underlying jealousy and have identified factors that result in jealousy . sociologists have demonstrated that cultural beliefs and values play an important role in determining what triggers jealousy and what constitutes socially acceptable expressions of jealousy . biologists have identified factors that may unconsciously influence the expression of jealousy . throughout history , artists have also explored the theme of jealousy in photographs , paintings , films , songs , plays , poems , and books , and theologians have offered religious views of jealousy based on the scriptures of their respective faiths .