metastasis is a pathogenic agent 's spread from an initial or primary site to a different or secondary site within the host 's body ; '' metastasis '' , merriam–webster online , accessed 20 aug 2017 . the term is typically used when referring to metastasis by a cancerous tumor . the newly pathological sites , then , are metastases ( mets ) . it is generally distinguished from cancer invasion , which is the direct extension and penetration by cancer cells into neighboring tissues . cancer occurs after cells are genetically altered to proliferate rapidly and indefinitely . this uncontrolled proliferation by mitosis produces a primary heterogeneic tumour . the cells which constitute the tumor eventually undergo metaplasia , followed by dysplasia then anaplasia , resulting in a malignant phenotype . this malignancy allows for invasion into the circulation , followed by invasion to a second site for tumorigenesis . some cancer cells known as circulating tumor cells acquire the ability to penetrate the walls of lymphatic or blood vessels , after which they are able to circulate through the bloodstream to other sites and tissues in the body . this process is known ( respectively ) as lymphatic or hematogenous spread . after the tumor cells come to rest at another site , they re-penetrate the vessel or walls and continue to multiply , eventually forming another clinically detectable tumor . this new tumor is known as a metastatic ( or secondary ) tumor . metastasis is one of the hallmarks of cancer , distinguishing it from benign tumors . most cancers can metastasize , although in varying degrees . basal cell carcinoma for example rarely metastasizes . when tumor cells metastasize , the new tumor is called a secondary or metastatic tumor , and its cells are similar to those in the original or primary tumor . this means that if breast cancer metastasizes to the lungs , the secondary tumor is made up of abnormal breast cells , not of abnormal lung cells . the tumor in the lung is then called metastatic breast cancer , not lung cancer . metastasis is a key element in cancer staging systems such as the tnm staging system , where it represents the '' m '' . in overall stage grouping , metastasis places a cancer in stage iv . the possibilities of curative treatment are greatly reduced , or often entirely removed when a cancer has metastasized .