saint joseph 's day , 19 march , also called the solemnity of saint joseph , is in western christianity the principal feast day of saint joseph , husband of the virgin mary and legal father of jesus christ . it has the rank of a solemnity in the catholic church . it is a feast or commemoration in the provinces of the anglican communion , the prayerbook society of canada and a feast or festival in the lutheran church . saint joseph 's day is the patron saint for poland as well as for canada , persons named joseph , josephine , etc . , for religious institutes , schools and parishes bearing his name , and for carpenters . it is also father 's day in some catholic countries , mainly spain , portugal , and italy . it is not a holy day of obligation for catholics in the united states . the 19th of march was dedicated to saint joseph in several western calendars by the 10th century , and this custom was established in rome by 1479 . pope pius v extended its use to the entire roman rite by his apostolic constitution quo primum ( 14 july 1570 ) . originally a double of the second class and a feast of precept , it was re-raised to be of precept in 1917 after having this status intermittently lost , and consequently also raised to its current rank of double of the first class ( now called a solemnity ) , having become in the meantime the rank common to all remaining general feasts of precept . since 1969 , episcopal conferences may , if they wish , transfer it to a date outside lent . even if it occurs inside lent on the usual date of march 19 , it is still observed as a solemnity of a saint- this is one of the few times during lent the gloria may be said or sung , the vesture is changed from the purple or violet of lent to white or gold ( as it would be for such a solemnity normally ) , the collect and the eucharistic prayer 's preface and other prayers are from the solemnity and not lent , the hymns are more joyful , and the creed is said . however , the alleluia is still not used , the tract being used instead , per lenten regulations . calendarium romanum ( libreria editrice vaticana 1969 ) , p . 89 between 1870 and 1955 , an additional feast was celebrated in honor of saint joseph as spouse of the blessed virgin mary and patron of the universal church , the latter title having been given to him by pope pius ix . originally celebrated on the third sunday after easter with an octave , after divino afflatu latin original of divino afflatu ; english translation of saint pius x ( see reform of the roman breviary by pope pius x ) , it was moved to the preceding wednesday ( because wednesday was the day of the week specifically dedicated to st . joseph , st . john the baptist and local patrons ) . the feast was also retitled the solemnity of saint joseph . this celebration and its accompanying octave were abolished during the modernisation and simplification of rubrics under pope pius xii in 1955 . at the same time , pope pius xii established an additional feast of '' st . joseph the worker '' , to be celebrated on 1 may , in order to coincide with the celebration of international workers ' day ( may day ) in many countries . until this time , 1 may had been the feast of the apostles saint philip and james , but that feast was then moved to the next free day , 11 may ( and again to 3 may , in 1969 , having become free in the meantime ) . in the new calendar published in 1969 , the feast of saint joseph the worker , which at one time occupied the highest possible rank in the church calendar , was reduced to an optional memorial , the lowest rank for a saint 's day . calendarium romanum ( libreria editrice vaticana 1969 ) , p . 92 the eastern orthodox church celebrates saint joseph on the sunday after christmas . popular customs among christians of various liturgical traditions observing saint joseph 's day are attending mass or the divine service , wearing red-coloured clothing , carrying dried fava beans that have been blessed , and assembling home altars dedicated to saint joseph .