idolatry is the worship of an idol or cult image , being a physical image , such as a statue , or a person in place of god . , quote : '' idolatry ( . ) in the first commandment denotes the notion of worship , adoration , or reverence of an image of god . '' in abrahamic religions , namely judaism , christianity and islam , idolatry connotes the worship of something or someone other than god as if it were god . in these monotheistic religions , idolatry has been considered as the '' worship of false gods '' and is forbidden by the values such as the ten commandments . other monotheistic religions may apply similar rules . in many indian religions , such as theistic and non-theistic forms of hinduism , buddhism and jainism , idols ( murti ) are considered as symbolism for the absolute but not the absolute , or icons of spiritual ideas , jeaneane d fowler ( 1996 ) , hinduism : beliefs and practices , sussex academic press , , pages 41–45 or the embodiment of the divine . klaus klostermaier ( 2010 ) , a survey of hinduism , state university of new york press , , pages 264–267 it is a means to focus one 's religious pursuits and worship ( bhakti ) . karel werner ( 1995 ) , love divine : studies in bhakti and devotional mysticism , routledge , , pages 45-46 ; john cort ( 2011 ) , jains in the world , oxford university press , , pages 80–85 in the traditional religions of ancient egypt , greece , rome , africa , asia , the americas and elsewhere , the reverence of an image or statue has been a common practice , and cult images have carried different meanings and significance . the opposition to the use of any icon or image to represent ideas of reverence or worship is called aniconism . aniconism , encyclopædia britannica the destruction of idols and images as icons of veneration is called iconoclasm , and this has long been accompanied with violence between religious groups that forbid idol worship and those who have accepted icons , images and statues for veneration and / or worship . the definition of idolatry has been a contested topic within abrahamic religions , with many muslims and most protestantism condemning the catholic and eastern orthodox practice of venerating the virgin mary in many churches as a form of idolatry . the history of religions has been marked with accusations and denials of idolatry . these accusations have considered statues and images to be devoid of symbolism . alternatively , the topic of idolatry has been a source of disagreements between many religions , or within denominations of various religions , with the presumption that icons of one 's own religious practices have meaningful symbolism , while another person 's different religious practices do not .