medgar wiley evers ( july 2 , 1925june 12 , 1963 ) was an american civil rights activist in mississippi , the state 's field secretary for the naacp , and a world war ii veteran who had served in the united states army . he worked to overturn segregation at the university of mississippi , end the segregation of public facilities , and expand opportunities for african americans , which included the enforcement of suffrage . a college graduate , evers became active in the civil rights movement in the 1950s . following the 1954 ruling of the united states supreme court in brown v . board of education that segregated public schools were unconstitutional , evers challenged the segregation of the state-supported public university of mississippi , applying to law school there . he also worked for voting rights , economic opportunity , access to public facilities , and other changes in the segregated society . evers was awarded the 1963 naacp spingarn medal . evers was assassinated in 1963 by byron de la beckwith , the medgar evers assassination , pbs newshour , ross barnett , april 18 , 2002 . retrieved january 6 , 2021 . a member of the white citizens ' council in jackson , mississippi . this group was formed in 1954 in mississippi to resist the integration of schools and civil rights activism . as a veteran , evers was buried with military funeral at arlington national cemetery . his murder and the resulting trials inspired civil rights protests ; his life and these events inspired numerous works of art , music , and film . all-white juries failed to reach verdicts in the first two trials of beckwith in the 1960s . he was convicted in 1994 in a new state trial based on new evidence . medgar 's widow , myrlie evers , became a noted activist in her own right , serving as national chair of the naacp . his brother charles evers was the first african american to be elected as mayor of a city in mississippi in the post-reconstruction era ; he won the office in 1969 in fayette .