transport layer security ( tls ) , and its now-deprecated predecessor , secure sockets layer ( ssl ) , are cryptographic protocols designed to provide communications security over a computer network . several versions of the protocols are widely used in applications such as email , instant messaging , and voice over ip , but its use as the security layer in https remains the most publicly visible . the tls protocol aims primarily to provide privacy and data integrity between two or more communicating computer applications . when secured by tls , connections between a client ( e.g . , a web browser ) and a server ( e.g . , wikipedia.org ) should have one or more of the following properties : the connection is private ( or secure ) because a symmetric-key algorithm is used to encrypt the data transmitted . the keys for this symmetric encryption are generated uniquely for each connection and are based on a shared secret that was negotiated at the start of the session . the server and client negotiate the details of which encryption algorithm and cryptographic keys to use before the first byte of data is transmitted ( see below ) . the negotiation of a shared secret is both secure ( the negotiated secret is unavailable to eavesdroppers and can not be obtained , even by an attacker who places themself in the middle of the connection ) and reliable ( no attacker can modify the communications during the negotiation without being detected ) . the identity of the communicating parties can be authenticated using public-key cryptography . this authentication is required for the server and optional for the client . the connection is reliable because each message transmitted includes a message integrity check using a message authentication code to prevent undetected loss or alteration of the data during transmission . in addition to the above , careful configuration of tls can provide additional privacy-related properties such as forward secrecy , ensuring that any future disclosure of encryption keys can not be used to decrypt any tls communications recorded in the past . tls supports many different methods for exchanging keys , encrypting data , and authenticating message integrity ( see below ) . as a result , secure configuration of tls involves many configurable parameters , and not all choices provide all of the privacy-related properties described in the list above ( see the ยง key exchange ( authentication ) , ยง cipher security , and ยง data integrity tables ) . attempts have been made to subvert aspects of the communications security that tls seeks to provide , and the protocol has been revised several times to address these security threats . developers of web browsers have repeatedly revised their products to defend against potential security weaknesses after these were discovered ( see tls/ssl support history of web browsers ) . the tls protocol comprises two layers : the tls record and the tls handshake protocols . tls is a proposed internet engineering task force ( ietf ) standard , first defined in 1999 , and the current version is tls 1.3 defined in august 2018 . tls builds on the earlier ssl specifications ( 1994 , 1995 , 1996 ) developed by netscape communications for adding the https protocol to their navigator web browser .