alexander lavelle harris is a fictional character created for the action-horror/fantasy television series buffy the vampire slayer ( 1997–2003 ) . he was developed by joss whedon and portrayed throughout the television series by nicholas brendon and in two episodes by his twin brother , kelly donovan . he was conceived as an everyman and a male character for series heroine buffy summers ( sarah michelle gellar ) to interact with , and to provide comic relief in the series . xander is one of several friends of buffy who assist her in saving the world against numerous supernatural events that plague sunnydale , a town built over a doorway to hell . xander is based in part on whedon himself , particularly in his high school years ; as such , he is often the most geeky as well as witty and verbose of buffy ' s characters . the character 's overriding arc through the series has been his struggle towards maturity and earning the respect of others . in the canonical comic book continuation of the series , buffy the vampire slayer season eight ( 2007–2011 ) , xander comes to achieve these goals in becoming the tactical leader of a global army of vampire slayers alongside buffy . academic attention to the character has frequently come in the form of gender studies or with a focus on social class , reflecting xander 's working class home life and his fears of inadequacy . however , xander 's unique position as both outside and within the main group enhances his insight into the other characters , especially as the series continues ; in season eight , he is buffy 's unofficial '' watcher '' , who watches over her and has a clear perspective . critics have noted that although xander frequently exhibits a struggle of masculinity , his storylines often focus on his romantic conquests . following his unreciprocated love for buffy , these include the tumultuous relationship with rich girl cordelia chase ( charisma carpenter ) , brief fling with his best friend willow ( alyson hannigan ) and his long-term relationship with ex-demon anya ( emma caulfield ) . in season eight , the character 's older-brother relationship with buffy 's little sister dawn ( michelle trachtenberg ) also develops along romantic lines , too late for buffy to realize her compatibility with xander . the character of xander harris also appears in numerous items in the series expanded universe , such as comic books , tie-in novels and video games .