is a comic book series created by stan sakai . it is set primarily at the beginning of the edo period of japanese history and features anthropomorphic animals replacing humans . the main character is a rabbit rōnin , miyamoto usagi , whom sakai based partially on the famous swordsman miyamoto musashi . usagi wanders the land on a musha shugyō ( warrior 's pilgrimage ) , occasionally selling his services as a bodyguard . usagi yojimbo is heavily influenced by japanese cinema ; it has included references to the work of akira kurosawa ( the title of the series is derived from kurosawa 's 1960 film yojimbo ) , as well as to icons of popular japanese cinema , such as lone wolf and cub , zatoichi , and godzilla . the series is also influenced somewhat by groo the wanderer by sergio aragonés ( sakai is the letterer for that series ) , but the overall tone of usagi yojimbo is more serious and reflective . the series follows the standard traditional japanese naming-convention for all featured characters : their family names followed by their given names . the books are primarily episodic , with underlying larger plots which create long extended storylines—though there are some novel-length narratives . the stories include many references to japanese history and japanese folklore , and sometimes include mythical creatures . the architecture , clothes , weapons and other objects are drawn with a faithfulness to period style . there are often stories whose purpose is to illustrate various elements of japanese arts and crafts , such as the fashioning of kites , swords , and pottery . those efforts have been successful enough for the series to be awarded a parents ' choice award in 1990 for its educational value through sakai 's '' skillful weaving of facts and legends into his work '' . usagi yojimbo first appeared in albedo anthropomorphics 2 , published by thoughts and images in november 1984 . albedo anthropomorphics 2 ( thoughts and images , 1984 ) stan sakai accepted an offer to move his warrior rabbit to fantagraphics books where he appeared in several issues of the new anthropomorphic anthology series critters . usagi 's popularity influenced fantagraphics to then release the usagi yojimbo summer special in october 1986 usagi yojimbo summer special ( fantagraphics books 1986 ) and then to give the ronin rabbit his own ongoing series with issue 1 being published in july 1987 . usagi yojimbo 1 ( fantagraphics books 1987 ) usagi was named the 31st-greatest comic book character by empire magazine empire the 50 greatest comic book characters . retrieved on 2015-07-30 . and was ranked 92nd in ign 's list of the top 100 comic book heroes . rolling stone named usagi yojimbo no . & nbsp ; 43 in their '50 best non-superhero graphic novels' .