rensselaer is classified among '' r1 : doctoral universities – very high research activity '' . rensselaer has established six areas of research as institute priorities : biotechnology , energy security , nanotechnology , information technology , and media studies . research is organized under the office of the vice president for research , jonathan dordick . in 2018 , rensselaer operated 34 research centers and maintained annual sponsored research expenditures of 100.8 million . one of the most recent of rensselaer 's research centers is the center for biotechnology and interdisciplinary studies , a 218,000 square-foot research facility and a national pacesetter for fundamental and applied research in biotechnology . the primary target of the research center is biologics , a research priority based on data-driven understanding of proteomics , protein regulation , and gene regulation . it involves using biocatalysis and synthetic biology tools to block or supplement the actions of specific cells or proteins in the immune system . over the past decade , cbis has produced over 2,000 peer-reviewed publications with over 30,000 citations and currently employs over 200 scientists and engineers . the center is also used primarily to train undergraduate and graduate students , with over 1,000 undergraduates and 200 doctoral students trained . the center also has numerous academic and industry partners including the icahn school of medicine at mount sinai . these partnerships have resulted in numerous advances over the last decade through new commercial developments in diagnostics , therapeutics , medical devices , and regenerative medicine which are a direct result of research at the center . examples of advancements include the creation of synthetic heparin , antimicrobial coatings , detoxification chemotherapy , on-demand bio-medicine , implantable sensors , and 3d cellular array chips . image : ibm blue gene p supercomputer.jpg thumb upright 1.0 left a blue gene/p supercomputer similar to rensselaer 's center for computational innovations rensselaer also hosts the tetherless world constellation , a multidisciplinary research institution focused on theories , methods , and applications of the world wide web . research is carried out in three inter-connected themes : future web , semantic foundations and xinformatics . at rensselaer , a constellation is a multidisciplinary team composed of senior and junior faculty members , research scientists , and postdoctoral , graduate , and undergraduate students . the faculty experts for the twc constellation are james hendler , deborah mcguinness and peter fox . faculty alumni of twc includes heng ji ( natural language processing ) . in 2016 , the constellation received a one million dollar grant from the bill & melinda gates foundation for continuing work on a novel data visualization platform that will harness and accelerate the analysis of vast amounts of data for the foundation 's healthy birth , growth , and development knowledge integration initiative . in conjunction with the constellation , rensselaer operates the center for computational innovations which is the result of a 100 million collaboration between rensselaer , ibm , and new york state to further nanotechnology innovations . the center is currently home to the most powerful private-university based supercomputer in the world and its supercomputer is consistently ranked among the most powerful in the world , capable of performing over 1.1 peta-flops . the center 's main focus is on reducing the cost associated with the development of nanoscale materials and devices , such as used in the semiconductor industry . the university also utilizes the center for interdisciplinary research in biotechnology , medicine , energy , and other fields . rensselaer additionally operates a nuclear reactor and testing facility & nbsp ; & ndash ; the only university-run reactor in new york state & nbsp ; & ndash ; as well as the gaerttner linear accelerator , which is currently being upgraded under a 9.44 million grant from the us department of energy .