signals such as the 3m high visibility signal and mccain programmable visibility signal utilize light-diffusing optics and a fresnel lens to create the signal indication . the light from a 150 w par46 sealed-beam lamp in these '' programmable visibility '' signals passes through a set of two glass lenses at the back of the signal . the first lens , a frosted glass diffusing lens , diffuses the light into a uniform ball of light around five inches in diameter . the light then passes through a nearly identical lens known as an optical limiter ( 3m 's definition of the lens itself ) , also known as a '' programming lens '' , also five inches in diameter . using a special aluminum foil-based adhesive tape , these signals are '' masked '' or programmed by the programming lens so that only certain lanes of traffic will view the indication . at the front of these programmable visibility signals is a 12 '' fresnel lens , each lens tinted to meet united states institute of transportation engineers ( ite ) chromaticity and luminance standards . the fresnel lens collimates the light output created by the lamp , and creates a uniform display of light for the lane in which it is intended . these signals were first developed by the 3m company in the late 1960s , and were popular in the late 1970s as traffic density increased . in addition to being positioned and mounted for desired visibility for their respective traffic , some traffic lights are also aimed , louvered , or shaded to minimize misinterpretation from other lanes . for example , a fresnel lens on an adjacent through-lane signal may be aimed to prevent left-turning traffic from anticipating its own green arrow . today , mccain traffic systems is the only u.s.-based manufacturer producing optically programmable traffic signals similar to the 3m model . intelight inc . manufactures a programmable traffic signal that uses a software-controlled led array and electronics to steer the light beam toward the desired approach . the signal is programmed unlike the 3m and mccain models . it requires a connection to a laptop or smartphone with the manufacturer software installed . connections can be made directly with a direct-serial interface kit , or wirelessly with a radio kit over wifi to the signal . in addition to aiming , fresnel lenses , and louvers , visors and back panels are also useful in areas where sunlight would diminish the contrast and visibility of a signal face . typical applications for these signals were skewed intersections , specific multi-lane control , left-turn pocket signals or other areas where complex traffic situations existed .