the royal flight to varennes during the night of 20 & ndash ; 21 june 1791 was a significant episode in the french revolution in which king louis xvi of france , his queen marie antoinette , and their immediate family unsuccessfully attempted to escape from paris in order to initiate a counter-revolution at the head of loyal troops under royalist officers concentrated at montmédy near the frontier . they escaped only as far as the small town of varennes-en-argonne , where they were arrested after having been recognized at their previous stop in sainte-menehould . this incident was a turning point after which popular hostility towards the french monarchy as an institution , as well as towards the king and queen as individuals , became much more pronounced . the king 's attempted flight provoked charges of treason that ultimately led to his execution in 1793 . the escape failed due to a series of misadventures , delays , misinterpretations and poor judgments . much was due to the king 's indecision ; he repeatedly postponed the schedule , allowing small problems to become much larger . furthermore , he overestimated popular support for the traditional monarchy , mistakenly believing only parisian radicals supported the revolution and that the populace as a whole opposed it . he also mistakenly believed that he enjoyed particular favor with the peasantry and other commoners . timothy tackett , when the king took flight ( 2003 ) ch . 3 the king 's flight was traumatic for france , inciting reactions ranging from anxiety to violence and panic . everyone was aware that foreign intervention was imminent . the realization that the king had effectually repudiated the revolutionary reforms made up to that point came as a shock to people who had seen him as a well-intentioned monarch who governed as a manifestation of god 's will . republicanism quickly evolved from being merely a subject of coffeehouse debate to the dominant ideal of revolutionary leaders . timothy tackett , when the king took flight ( 2003 ) p . 222 the king 's brother also fled on the same night , by a different route . he successfully escaped , and spent the french revolution in exile , later returning to be crowned king louis xviii .