māori culture is the customs , cultural practices , and beliefs of the indigenous māori people of new zealand . it originated from , and is still part of , polynesians culture . māori culture forms a distinctive part of new zealand culture and , due to a large diaspora and the incorporation of māori motifs into popular culture , it is found throughout the world . within māoridom , and to a lesser extent throughout new zealand as a whole , the word is often used as an approximate synonym for māori culture , the māori language suffix being roughly equivalent to the qualitative noun-ending -ness in english . has also been translated as '' a māori way of life . '' four distinct but overlapping cultural eras have contributed historically to māori culture : before māori culture had differentiated itself from other polynesian cultures ( archaic period ) before widespread european contact ( classic period ) the 19th century , in which māori began interacting more intensively with european visitors and settlers the modern era since the beginning of the twentieth century in the modern era has been shaped by increasing urbanisation , closer contact with pākehā ( new zealanders of european descent ) and revival of traditional practices . traditional māori arts play a large role in new zealand art . they include ( carving ) , ( weaving ) , ( group performance ) , ( oratory ) , and ( tattoo ) . the patterns and characters represented record the beliefs and genealogies of māori . practitioners often follow the techniques of their ancestors , but in the 21st century māoritanga also includes contemporary arts such as film , television , poetry and theatre . the māori language is known as , shortened to ( literally , '' the language '' ) . at the beginning of the twentieth century , it seemed as if – as well as other aspects of māori life – might disappear . in the 1980s , however , government-sponsored schools ( kura kaupapa māori ) began to teach in , educating those with european as well as those with māori ancestry . traditional instruments sometime accompany the group , though the guitar is also commonly used . many new zealand schools now have a as part of the māori studies curriculum . today , national competitions are held where groups are judged to find the best performers ; these draw large crowds . the common expression '' '' is , strictly speaking , a tautology . the – an action chant , often described as a '' war dance '' , but more a chant with hand gestures and foot stomping , originally performed by warriors before a battle , proclaiming their strength and prowess by way of abusing the opposition . now , this procedure is regularly performed by new zealand representatives of rugby and rugby league teams before a game begins . there are many different ; though , one , '' '' by te rauparaha , is much more widely known than any other .