the royal charter made the '' governor and company & nbsp ; . , and their successors , the true and absolute lords and proprietors , of the same territory , limits and places aforesaid , and of all other the premisses sic '' , and granted them the authority '' to erect and build such castles , fortifications , forts , garrisons , colonies or plantations , towns or villages , in any parts or places within the limits and bounds granted before in these presents , unto the said governor and company , as they in their discretion shall think fit and requisite '' . following merger with the north west company in 1821 , the hudson ’ s bay company 's monopoly privileges and licence were extended to trade over the north-western territory . the rupert 's land act 1868 of the united kingdom parliament authorized the sale of rupert 's land to canada with the understanding that rupert 's land ' shall include the whole of the lands and territories held or claimed to be held by the '' hudson 's bay company . the prevailing attitude of the time was that rupert ’ s land was owned by the hudson ’ s bay company because '' from the beginning to the end , the hudson ’ s bay company had always claimed up to the parallel 49 '' , and argued that the royal charter and various acts of parliament granted them '' all the regions under british dominion watered by streams flowing into hudson bay '' . rupert 's land had been essentially a private continental estate covering 3.9 million km 2 in the heart of north america that stretched from the atlantic to the rocky mountains , and from the prairies to the arctic circle . even sir john a . macdonald saw the land as being sold to canada : '' no explanation has been made of the arrangement by which the country ( rupert 's land ) is handed over to the queen , and that it is her majesty who transfers the country to canada with the same rights to settlers as existed before . all these poor people know is that canada has bought the country from the hudson 's bay company , and that they are handed over like a flock of sheep to us . '' however , this did not settle the issue of aboriginal title over the land . at the time the royal charter was granted in 1670 , the crown did not have the authority to give jurisdiction of sovereignty over the territory already settled and inhabited by the indigenous people of north america . the royal charter ignored the first nations who were already living on the land and exercising sovereignty over it , and the hudson 's bay company had not acquired title to the land from the aboriginal communities prior to their negotiations with canada that began in 1856 . due to the royal charter and the later rupert 's land act 1868 , the crown held the attitude that they already possessed the land , and that the treaties were a peaceful way to allow for settlement of the northwest territories in lands the crown already owned . while first nations often initiated treaties to protect their rights to land in anticipation of or in direct response to disruptive white settlement , the crown saw them as a way to ensure sovereignty over the land from a people who only had sovereignty as a '' personal and usufructuary right , dependent upon the good will of the sovereign '' in the royal proclamation of 1763 . '' at the time of the discovery of america , and long after , it was an accepted rule that heathen and infidel nations were perpetual enemies , and that the christian prince or people first discovering and taking possession of the country became its absolute proprietor , and could deal with the lands as such '' . the calder v british columbia ( ag ) case in 1973 was the first case in canadian law that acknowledged '' a declaration that the aboriginal title , otherwise known as the indian title , of the plaintiffs to their ancient tribal territory hereinbefore described , has never been lawfully extinguished '' . this ruling has led to more aboriginal land claim negotiations , and overhauled much of the process of addressing aboriginal title to land that existed prior to colonization and confederation , and whether that title had been extinguished .