in january 1898 , maine was sent from key west , florida , to havana , cuba , to protect u.s . interests during the cuban war of independence . three weeks later , at 21:40 , on 15 february , an explosion on board maine occurred in the havana harbor . later investigations revealed that more than of powder charges for the vessel 's six- and ten-inch guns had detonated , obliterating the forward third of the ship . the remaining wreckage rapidly settled to the bottom of the harbor . most of maines crew were sleeping or resting in the enlisted quarters , in the forward part of the ship , when the explosion occurred . the 1898 us navy surgeon general reported that the ship 's crew consisted of 355 : 26 officers , 290 enlisted sailors , and 39 marines . of these , there were 261 fatalities : two officers and 251 enlisted sailors and marines either killed by the explosion or drowned seven others were rescued but soon died of their injuries one officer later died of '' cerebral affection '' ( shock ) of the 94 survivors , 16 were uninjured . in total , 260 men lost their lives as a result of the explosion or shortly thereafter , and six more died later from injuries . captain sigsbee and most of the officers survived , because their quarters were in the aft portion of the ship . altogether there were 89 survivors , 18 of whom were officers . the city of washington , an american merchant steamship , aided in rescuing the crew . the cause of the accident was immediately debated . waking up president mckinley to break the news , commander francis w . dickins referred to it as an '' accident . '' commodore george dewey , commander of the asiatic squadron , '' feared at first that she had been destroyed by the spanish , which of course meant war , and i was getting ready for it when a later dispatch said it was an accident . '' navy captain philip r . alger , an expert on ordnance and explosives , posted a bulletin at the navy department the next day saying that the explosion had been caused by a spontaneous fire in the coal bunkers . assistant navy secretary theodore roosevelt wrote a letter protesting this statement , which he viewed as premature . roosevelt argued that alger should not have commented on an ongoing investigation , saying , '' mr . alger can not possibly know anything about the accident . all the best men in the department agree that , whether probable or not , it certainly is possible that the ship was blown up by a mine . ''