the battle of zama was fought in 202 & nbsp ; bc near zama , now in tunisia , and marked the end of the second punic war . a roman army led by scipio africanus , with crucial support from numidian leader masinissa , defeated the carthage army led by hannibal . after defeating carthaginian and numidian armies at the battles of utica and the great plains , scipio imposed peace terms on the carthaginians , who had no choice but to accept them . at the same time , the carthaginians recalled hannibal 's army from italy . confident in hannibal 's forces , the carthaginians broke the armistice with rome . scipio and hannibal confronted each other near zama regia . hannibal had 36,000 infantry to scipio 's 29,000 . one third of hannibal 's army were citizen levies , and the romans had 6,100 cavalry to carthage 's 4,000 , as most of the numidian cavalry that hannibal had employed with great success in italy had defected to the romans . hannibal also employed 80 war elephants . the elephants opened the battle by charging the main roman army . scipio 's soldiers avoided the elephants by opening their ranks and drove them off with missiles . the roman and numidian cavalry subsequently defeated the carthaginian cavalry and chased them from the battlefield . hannibal 's first line of mercenaries attacked scipio 's infantry and were defeated . the second line of citizen levies and the mercenaries ' remnants assaulted and inflicted heavy losses on the roman first line . the roman second line joined the struggle and pushed back the carthaginian assault . hannibal 's third line of veterans , reinforced by the citizen levies and mercenaries , faced off against the roman army , which had been redeployed into a single line . the combat was fierce and evenly matched . finally , scipio 's cavalry returned to the battle and attacked hannibal 's army in the rear , routing and destroying it . the carthaginians lost 20,000–25,000 killed and 8,500–20,000 captured . scipio lost 4,000–5,000 men , and 1,500–2,500 romans and 2,500 numidians were killed . defeated on their home ground , the carthaginian ruling elite sued for peace and accepted humiliating terms , ending the 17-year war .