the process was started before the arch of the foot had a chance to develop fully , usually between the ages of 4 and 9 . binding usually started during the winter months since the feet were more likely to be numb , and therefore the pain would not be as extreme . first , each foot would be soaked in a warm mixture of herbs and animal blood ; this was intended to soften the foot and aid the binding . then , the toenails were cut back as far as possible to prevent in-growth and subsequent infections , since the toes were to be pressed tightly into the sole of the foot . cotton bandages , 3 & nbsp ; m long and 5 & nbsp ; cm wide ( 10 & nbsp ; ft by 2 in ) , were prepared by soaking them in the blood and herb mixture . to enable the size of the feet to be reduced , the toes on each foot were curled under , then pressed with great force downward and squeezed into the sole of the foot until the toes broke . the broken toes were held tightly against the sole of the foot while the foot was then drawn down straight with the leg and the arch of the foot was forcibly broken . the bandages were repeatedly wound in a figure-eight movement , starting at the inside of the foot at the instep , then carried over the toes , under the foot , and around the heel , the freshly broken toes being pressed tightly into the sole of the foot . at each pass around the foot , the binding cloth was tightened , pulling the ball of the foot and the heel together , causing the broken foot to fold at the arch , and pressing the toes underneath the sole . the binding was pulled so tightly that the girl could not move her toes at all and the ends of the binding cloth were then sewn so that the girl could not loosen it . the girl 's broken feet required a great deal of care and attention , and they would be unbound regularly . each time the feet were unbound , they were washed , the toes carefully checked for injury , and the nails carefully and meticulously trimmed . when unbound , the broken feet were also kneaded to soften them and the soles of the girl 's feet were often beaten to make the joints and broken bones more flexible . the feet were also soaked in a concoction that caused any necrotic flesh to fall off . immediately after this procedure , the girl 's broken toes were folded back under and the feet were rebound . the bindings were pulled even tighter each time the girl 's feet were rebound . this unbinding and rebinding ritual was repeated as often as possible ( for the rich at least once daily , for poor peasants two or three times a week ) , with fresh bindings . it was generally an elder female member of the girl 's family or a professional foot binder who carried out the initial breaking and ongoing binding of the feet . it was considered preferable to have someone other than the mother do it , as she might have been sympathetic to her daughter 's pain and less willing to keep the bindings tight . for most the bound feet eventually became numb . however , once a foot had been crushed and bound , attempting to reverse the process by unbinding was painful , and the shape could not be reversed without a woman undergoing the same pain all over again .