modern art includes artistic work produced during the period extending roughly from the 1860s to the 1970s , and denotes the styles and philosophies of the art produced during that era . atkins 1990 , p . 102 . the term is usually associated with art in which the traditions of the past have been thrown aside in a spirit of experimentation . gombrich 1958 , p . 419 . modern artists experimented with new ways of seeing and with fresh ideas about the nature of materials and functions of art . a tendency away from the narrative , which was characteristic for the traditional arts , toward abstraction is characteristic of much modern art . more recent artistic production is often called contemporary art or postmodern art . modern art begins with the heritage of painters like vincent van gogh , paul cézanne , paul gauguin , georges seurat and henri de toulouse-lautrec all of whom were essential for the development of modern art . at the beginning of the 20th century henri matisse and several other young artists including the pre-cubists georges braque , andré derain , raoul dufy , jean metzinger and maurice de vlaminck revolutionized the paris art world with '' wild '' , multi-colored , expressive landscapes and figure paintings that the critics called fauvism . matisse 's two versions of the dance signified a key point in his career and in the development of modern painting . russell t . clement . four french symbolists . greenwood press , 1996 . page 114 . it reflected matisse 's incipient fascination with primitive art : the intense warm color of the figures against the cool blue-green background and the rhythmical succession of the dancing nudes convey the feelings of emotional liberation and hedonism . at the start of 20th-century western painting , and initially influenced by toulouse-lautrec , gauguin and other late-19th-century innovators , pablo picasso made his first cubism paintings based on cézanne 's idea that all depiction of nature can be reduced to three solids : cube , sphere and cone . with the painting les demoiselles d'avignon ( 1907 ) , picasso dramatically created a new and radical picture depicting a raw and primitive brothel scene with five prostitutes , violently painted women , reminiscent of african tribal masks and his own new cubist inventions . analytic cubism was jointly developed by picasso and georges braque , exemplified by violin and candlestick , paris , from about 1908 through 1912 . analytic cubism , the first clear manifestation of cubism , was followed by synthetic cubism , practiced by braque , picasso , fernand léger , juan gris , albert gleizes , marcel duchamp and several other artists into the 1920s . synthetic cubism is characterized by the introduction of different textures , surfaces , collage elements , papier collé and a large variety of merged subject matter . the notion of modern art is closely related to modernism . '' one way of understanding the relation of the terms 'modern , ' 'modernity , ' and 'modernism ' is that aesthetic modernism is a form of art characteristic of high or actualized late modernity , that is , of that period in which social , economic , and cultural life in the widest sense was revolutionized by modernity . this means that modernist art is scarcely thinkable outside the context of the modernized society of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries . social modernity is the home of modernist art , even where that art rebels against it . '' cahoone 1996 , p . 13 .