image : comiquetheatre.jpg thumb right a nickelodeon theatre in toronto , ontario , canada , c . 1910 . nickelodeons often used gaudy posters and ornamented facades to attract patrons , but bare walls and hard seats usually awaited within . the nickelodeon was the first type of indoor exhibition space dedicated to showing projected film in the united states . usually set up in converted storefronts , these small , simple theaters charged five cents for admission and flourished from about 1905 to 1915 . '' nickelodeon '' was concocted from nickel , the name of the u.s . five-cent coin , and the ancient greek word odeion , a roofed-over theater , the latter indirectly by way of the odéon in paris , emblematic of a very large and luxurious theater , much as the ritz was of a grand hotel . for unknown reasons , in 1949 the lyricist of a popular song '' music ! music ! music ! '' incorporated the refrain '' put another nickel in , in the nickelodeon… '' , evidently referring to either a jukebox or a mechanical musical instrument such as a coin-operated player piano or orchestrion . the meaning of the word has been muddied ever since . in fact , when it was current in the early 20th century , it was used only to refer to a small five-cent theater and not to any coin-in-the-slot machine , including amusement arcade motion-picture viewers such as the kinetoscope and mutoscope . the earliest films had been shown in kinetoscope or projected in vaudeville theaters as one of the otherwise live acts . nickelodeons drastically altered film exhibition practices and the leisure-time habits of a large segment of the american public . although they were characterized by continuous performances of a selection of short films , added attractions such as illustrated songs were sometimes an important feature . regarded as disreputable and dangerous by some civic groups and municipal agencies , crude , ill-ventilated nickelodeons with hard wooden seats were outmoded as longer films became common and larger , more comfortably furnished motion-picture theaters were built , a trend that culminated in the lavish '' movie palaces '' of the 1920s . film historian charles musser wrote : '' it is not too much to say that modern cinema began with the nickelodeons . ''