he took as his regnal name his surname rather than his forename since the islamic name ahmet might have had the effect of isolating him on the european stage . he also initially took the parallel name '' skanderbeg iii '' ( zogu claimed to be a successor of skanderbeg through descent through skanderbeg 's sister ; '' skanderbeg ii '' was taken to be prince wied , but this fell out of use ) . michael schmidt-neke , die verfassungen albaniens : mit einem anhang : die verfassung der republik kosova von 1990 . otto harrassowitz verlag , 2009 , p . 34 on the same day as he was declared king ( he was never technically crowned ) , he was declared field marshal of the royal albanian army . he proclaimed a constitutional monarchy similar to the contemporary regime in italy , created a strong police force , and instituted the zogist salute ( flat hand over the heart with palm facing downwards ) . zog hoarded gold coins and precious stones , which were used to back albania 's first paper currency . zog 's mother , sadije , was declared queen mother of albania , and zog also gave his brother and sisters royal status as prince and princesses zogu . one of his sisters , senije ( c . 1897–1969 ) , married prince şehzade mehmed abid of turkey , a son of sultan abdul hamid ii . zog 's constitution forbade any prince of the royal house from serving as prime minister or a member of the cabinet , and contained provisions for the potential extinction of the royal family . ironically , in light of later events , the constitution also forbade the union of the albanian throne with that of any other country . under the zogist constitution , the king of the albanians , like the king of the belgians , ascended the throne and exercised royal powers only after taking an oath before parliament ; zog himself swore an oath on the bible and the qur'an ( the king being muslim ) in an attempt to unify the country . in 1929 , king zog abolished sharia in albania , adopting in its place a civil code based on the swiss one , as atatürk 's turkey had done in the same decade . swiss laws , greek patriarch , time magazine , 15 april 1929 the price for such modernization was high , though . although nominally a constitutional monarch , in practice zog retained the dictatorial powers he had enjoyed as president . thus , in effect , albania remained a military dictatorship . in 1938 , zog opened the borders of albania to jewish refugees fleeing persecution in nazi germany . besa : the promise > bios