the clinton–lewinsky scandal was a united states political sex scandal that involved 49-year-old president bill clinton and 22-year-old white house intern monica lewinsky . the sexual relationship took place between 1995 and 1997 and came to light in 1998 . clinton ended a televised speech in late january 1998 with the statement that he '' did not have sexual relations with that woman , ms . lewinsky . '' further investigation led to charges of perjury and to the impeachment of bill clinton in 1998 by the u.s . house of representatives . he was subsequently acquitted on all impeachment charges of perjury and obstruction of justice in a 21-day senate trial . clinton was held in civil contempt of court by judge susan webber wright for giving misleading testimony in the paula jones regarding lewinsky and was also fined 90,000 by wright . his license to practice law was suspended in arkansas for five years ; shortly thereafter , he was disbarred from presenting cases in front of the united states supreme court . lewinsky was a graduate of lewis & clark college . she was hired during clinton 's first term in 1995 as an intern at the white house and was later an employee of the white house office of legislative affairs . some believe that clinton began a personal relationship with her while she worked at the white house , the details of which she later confided to linda tripp , her defense department co-worker who secretly recorded their telephone conversations . in january 1998 , tripp discovered that lewinsky had sworn an affidavit in the paula jones case , denying a relationship with clinton . she delivered tapes to ken starr , the independent counsel who was investigating clinton on other matters , including the whitewater scandal , the white house fbi files controversy , and the white house travel office controversy . during the grand jury testimony , clinton 's responses were carefully worded , and he argued , '' it depends on what the meaning of the word 'is ' is , '' with regard to the truthfulness of his statement that '' there is not a sexual relationship , an improper sexual relationship or any other kind of improper relationship . '' president bill clinton , the newshour with jim lehrer , january 21 , 1998 . the wide reporting of the scandal led to criticism of the press for over-coverage . this scandal is sometimes referred to as '' monicagate , '' rich , frank . '' journal ; monicagate year two '' , the new york times , december 16 , 1998 . '' lewinskygate , '' rich , frank . '' journal ; days of the locust '' , the new york times , february 25 , 1998 . '' tailgate , '' hennenberger , melinda . '' the president under fire '' , the new york times , january 29 , 1998 . '' sexgate , '' james barron with hoban , phoebe . '' dueling soaps '' , the new york times , january 28 , 1998 . and '' zippergate , '' following the '' -gate '' construction that has been used since watergate .