this article is specific to small loans , often provided in a pooled manner . for direct payments to individuals for specific projects , see micropatronage . for financial services to the poor , see microfinance . for small payments , see micropayment . microcredit is the extension of very small loans ( microloans ) to impoverished borrowers who typically lack collateral , steady employment , or a verifiable credit history . it is designed to support entrepreneurship and alleviate poverty . many recipients are illiterate , and therefore unable to complete paperwork required to get conventional loans . as of 2009 an estimated 74 million people held microloans that totaled us 38 billion . grameen bank reports that repayment success rates are between 95 and 98 percent . microcredit is part of microfinance , which provides a wider range of financial services , especially savings accounts , to the poor . modern microcredit is generally considered to have originated with the grameen bank founded in bangladesh in 1983 . many traditional banks subsequently introduced microcredit despite initial misgivings . the united nations declared 2005 the international year of microcredit . as of 2012 , microcredit is widely used in developing countries and is presented as having '' enormous potential as a tool for poverty alleviation . '' jason cons and kasia paprocki of the goldin institute , '' the limits of microcredit—a bangladeshi case '' , food first backgrounder ( institute for food and development policy ) , winter 2008 , volume 14 , number 4 . microcredit is a tool that can be helpful to possibly reduce feminization of poverty in developing countries . however , critics argue—some in the distant past gina neff : microcredit , microresults the left business observer 74 , october 1996 —that microcredit has not had a positive impact on gender relationships , does not alleviate poverty , has led many borrowers into a debt trap and constitutes a '' privatization of welfare '' . the first randomized evaluation of microcredit , conducted by abhijit banerjee and others , showed mixed results : there was no effect on household expenditure , gender equity , education or health , but the number of new businesses increased by one third compared to a control group . some of this increase in the number of businesses can be due to the phenomenon of 'informal intermediation ' documented by frithjof arp and collaborators : philanthropic , low-interest-rate microcredit fosters unintended entrepreneurship where some borrowers split loans they receive and on-lend to less-entrepreneurial borrowers .