this article is a general introduction to french literature . for detailed information on french literature in specific historic periods , see the separate historical articles in the template to the right . french literature generally speaking , literature written in the french language , particularly by citizens of france ; it may also refer to literature written by people living in france who speak traditional languages of france other than french . literature written in the french language , by citizens of other nations such as belgium , switzerland , canada , senegal , tunisia , algeria , morocco , etc . is referred to as francophone literature . france itself ranks first on the list of nobel prize in literature by country . for centuries , french literature has been an object of national pride for french people , and it has been one of the most influential components of the literature of europe . french literature discover france romance languages and literatures : why study french ? university of michigan one of the first known examples of french literature is the song of roland , the first major work in a series of poems known as , '' chanson de geste '' . the french language is a romance language derived from latin and heavily influenced principally by celtic and frankish . beginning in the 11th century , literature written in medieval french was one of the oldest vernacular literature in western europe and it became a key source of literary themes in the middle ages across the continent . although the european prominence of french literature was eclipsed in part by vernacular literature in italy in the 14th century , literature in france in the 16th century underwent a major creative evolution , and through the political and artistic programs of the ancien régime , french literature came to dominate european letters in the 17th century . in the 18th century , french became the literary lingua franca and diplomatic language of western europe ( and , to a certain degree , in america ) , and french letters have had a profound impact on all european and american literary traditions while at the same time being heavily influenced by these other national traditions africa , and the far east have brought the french language to non-european cultures that are transforming and adding to the french literary experience today . under the aristocratic ideals of the ancien régime ( the '' honnête homme '' ) , the nationalist spirit of post-revolutionary france , and the mass educational ideals of the third republic and modern france , the french have come to have a profound cultural attachment to their literary heritage . today , french schools emphasize the study of novels , theater and poetry ( often learnt by heart ) . the literary arts are heavily sponsored by the state and literary prizes are major news . the académie française and the institut de france are important linguistic and artistic institutions in france , and french television features shows on writers and poets ( one of the most watched shows on french television was apostrophes , roger cohen , '' the media business ; books star on tv , but only in france '' , the new york times , september 10 , 1990 . a weekly talk show on literature and the arts ) . literature matters deeply to the people of france and plays an important role in their sense of identity . as of 2006 , french literary people have been awarded more nobel prizes in literature than novelists , poets and essayists of any other country . ( however , writers in english—usa , uk , india , ireland , south africa , australia , canada , nigeria and saint lucia—have won twice as many nobels as the french . ) in 1964 jean-paul sartre was awarded the nobel prize in literature , but he declined it , stating that '' it is not the same thing if i sign jean-paul sartre or if i sign jean-paul sartre , nobel prize winner . a writer must refuse to allow himself to be transformed into an institution , even if it takes place in the most honorable form . ''