porcelain is a ceramic material made by heating materials , generally including a material like kaolin , in a kiln to temperatures between . the strength , and translucence of porcelain , relative to other types of pottery , arises mainly from vitrification and the formation of the mineral mullite within the body at these high temperatures . though definitions vary , porcelain can be divided into three main categories : hard-paste , soft-paste and bone china . the category that an object belongs to depends on the composition of the paste used to make the body of the porcelain object and the firing conditions . porcelain slowly evolved in china and was finally achieved ( depending on the definition used ) at some point about 2,000 to 1,200 years ago , then slowly spread to other east asian countries , and finally europe and the rest of the world . its manufacturing process is more demanding than that for earthenware and stoneware , the two other main types of pottery , and it has usually been regarded as the most prestigious type of pottery for its delicacy , strength , and its white colour . it combines well with both glazes and paint , and can be modelled very well , allowing a huge range of decorative treatments in tablewares , vessels and figurines . it also has many uses in technology and industry . the european name , porcelain in english , comes from the old italian porcellana ( cowrie shell ) because of its resemblance to the surface of the shell . porcelain is also referred to as china or fine china in some english-speaking countries , as it was first seen in imports from china . oed , '' china '' ; an introduction to pottery . 2nd edition . rado p . institute of ceramic / pergamon press . 1988 . usage of '' china '' in this sense is inconsistent , & it may be used of other types of ceramics also . properties associated with porcelain include low permeability and elasticity ; considerable strength , hardness , whiteness , translucent and resonance ; and a high resistance to chemical attack and thermal shock . porcelain has been described as being '' completely vitrified , hard , impermeable ( even before glazing ) , white or artificially coloured , translucent ( except when of considerable thickness ) , and resonant '' . harmonized commodity description and coding system : explanatory notes , volume 3 , 1986 , customs co-operation council , u.s . customs service , u.s . department of the treasury however , the term '' porcelain '' lacks a universal definition and has '' been applied in an unsystematic fashion to substances of diverse kinds which have only certain surface-qualities in common '' . definition in the combined nomenclature of the european communities defines , burton , 1906 traditionally , east asia only classifies pottery into low-fired wares ( earthenware ) and high-fired wares ( often translated as porcelain ) , the latter also including what europeans call stoneware , which is high-fired but not generally white or translucent . terms such as '' proto-porcelain '' , '' porcellaneous '' or '' near-porcelain '' may be used in cases where the ceramic body approaches whiteness and translucency . valenstein , s . ( 1998 ) . a handbook of chinese ceramics , pp . 22 , 59-60 , 72 , metropolitan museum of art , new york .