and sold more than cartridges by 1988 . the game went on to sell copies worldwide . it was reissued in 1992 as part of nintendo 's '' classic series '' and featured a grey cartridge . the game placed first in the player 's poll '' top 30 '' in nintendo powers first issue and continued to dominate the list into the early 1990s . the legend of zelda was also voted by nintendo power readers as the '' best challenge '' in the nintendo power awards '88 . the magazine also listed it as the best nintendo entertainment system video game ever created , stating that it was fun despite its age and it showed them new ways to do things in the genre such as hidden dungeons and its various weapons . gamesradar ranked it the third best nes game ever made . the staff praised its '' mix of complexity , open world design , and timeless graphics '' . critics lauded the graphics , kondo ’ s score , and writing . another praised aspect is its gameplay , which they hailed as groundbreaking . computer gaming world in 1988 named the game as the best adventure of the year for nintendo , stating that zelda had been a '' sensational success '' in translating a computer rpg to consoles . in 1990 , the magazine implied that the game was a killer app , causing computer crpg players who had dismissed consoles as '' mere arcade toys '' to buy the nes . zelda was reviewed in 1992 by total ! 2 where it received a 78 % rating due in great part to mediocre sub-scores for music and graphics . steve jarratt . the legend of zelda . total ! . issue 2 . pg.20-21 . february 1992 . a 1993 review of the game was printed in dragon 198 by sandy petersen in the '' eye of the monitor '' column . petersen gave the game 4 out of 5 stars . the legend of zelda has received critical acclaim from modern critics and remains well regarded . it is often featured in lists of games considered the greatest or most influential . it placed first in game informers list of the '' top 100 games of all time '' and '' the top 200 games of all time '' ( in 2001 and 2009 respectively ) , thirteenth in electronic gaming monthlys 100th issue listing the '' 100 best games of all time '' , note : contrary to the title , the intro to the article ( on page 100 ) explicitly states that the list covers console video games only , meaning pc games and arcade games were not eligible . fifth in electronic gaming monthlys 200th issue listing '' the greatest 200 videogames of their time '' , seventh in nintendo powers list of the 200 best nintendo games ever , 77th in official nintendo magazine 's 100 greatest nintendo games of all time and 80th among ign readers ' '' top 99 games '' . zelda was inducted into gamespy 's hall of fame in august 2000 and voted by gamespy 's editors as the tenth best game of all time . editors of the popular japanese magazine famitsu voted the game among the best on the famicom . in 1997 next generation listed the north american release in their '' five greatest game packages of all time '' , citing the die-cut hole which revealed the gold cartridge , full color manual , and fold-out map .