chester trent lott sr . ( born october 9 , 1941 ) is an american author and former politician . a former united states senate from mississippi , lott served in numerous leadership positions in both the united states house of representatives and the senate . he entered congress as one of the first of a wave of republicans winning seats in southern states that had been solid south . later in his career , he became senate majority leader , and , alternately , senate minority leader . in 2003 , he stepped down from the position after controversy due to his praising of senator strom thurmond 's 1948 segregationist dixiecrat presidential bid . from 1968 to 1972 , lott was an administrative assistant to representative william m . colmer of mississippi , who was also the chairman of the house rules committee . upon colmer 's retirement , lott won colmer 's former seat in the house of representatives . in 1988 , lott ran successfully for the u.s . senate to replace another retiree , john c . stennis . after republicans took the majority in the senate , lott became senate majority whip in 1995 and then senate majority leader in 1996 , upon the resignation of presidential nominee bob dole of kansas . on december 20 , 2002 , after significant controversy following comments regarding strom thurmond 's presidential candidacy , lott resigned as senate minority leader . he resigned from the senate in 2007 and fellow republican roger wicker won the 2008 special election to replace him . lott became a lobbyist , co-founding the breaux–lott leadership group . the firm was later acquired by law and lobbying firm patton boggs . lott serves as a senior fellow at the bipartisan policy center ( bpc ) , where he focuses on issues related to energy , national security , transportation and congressional reforms . lott is also a co-chair of bpc 's energy project . in june 2020 lott was fired from the washington law and lobbying firm squire patton boggs . theodoris meyer , '' trent lott fired by top lobbying firm : squire patton boggs gave no reason for the sudden departure , but lott said in an interview he was negotiating to join another firm '' politico june 9 , 2020