hawking radiation is black-body radiation that is predicted to be released by black holes , due to quantum effects near the black hole event horizon . it is named after the physicist stephen hawking , who provided a theoretical argument for its existence in 1974 . the requirement that black holes lose energy into the wider universe , and therefore can '' evaporate '' , and the radiated spectrum are both a result of analysing black hole thermal equilibrium combined with extreme redshifting effects very close to the event horizon , with some consideration of quantum entanglement effects . a pair of virtual particle arises just outside the event horizon due to ordinary quantum effects . very close to the event horizon , these always manifest as a pair of photons . it may happen that one of these photons passes beyond the event horizon , while the other escapes into the wider universe ( '' to infinity '' ) . - hawking radiation , scholarpedia . authored by prof . renaud parentani , laboratoire de physique théorique d'orsay , univ . paris-sud 11 , france , and prof . philippe spindel , université de mons , belgium ( 2011 ) , scholarpedia , 6 ( 12 ) :6958 a close analysis shows that the exponential redshifting effect of extreme gravity very close to the event horizon almost tears the escaping photon apart , and in addition very slightly amplifies it . the amplification gives rise to a '' partner wave '' , which carries negative energy and passes through the event horizon , where it remains trapped , reducing the total energy of the black hole . the escaping photon adds an equal amount of positive energy to the wider universe outside the black hole . in this way , no matter or energy ever actually leaves the black hole itself . a conservation law exists for the partner wave , which in theory shows that the emissions comprise an exact black body spectrum , bearing no information about the interior conditions . hawking radiation reduces the mass and rotational energy of black holes and is therefore also known as black hole evaporation . because of this , black holes that do not gain mass through other means are expected to shrink and ultimately vanish . for all except the smallest black holes , this would happen extremely slowly . the radiation temperature is inversely proportional to the black hole 's mass , so micro black holes are predicted to be larger emitters of radiation than more massive black holes and should thus shrink and dissipate faster .