ferdinand victor eugène delacroix ; ; 26 april 1798 & nbsp ; – 13 august 1863 ) was a french romantic artist regarded from the outset of his career as the leader of the french romantic school . noon , patrick , et al . , crossing the channel : british and french painting in the age of romanticism , p . 58 , tate publishing , 2003 . in contrast to the neoclassical perfectionism of his chief rival ingres , delacroix took for his inspiration the art of rubens and painters of the venetian renaissance , with an attendant emphasis on colour and movement rather than clarity of outline and carefully modelled form . dramatic and romantic content characterized the central themes of his maturity , and led him not to the classical models of greek and roman art , but to travel in north africa , in search of the exotic . gombrich , e.h . , the story of art , pages 504–6 . phaidon press limited , 1995 . friend and spiritual heir to théodore géricault , delacroix was also inspired by lord byron , with whom he shared a strong identification with the '' forces of the sublime '' , of nature in often violent action . clark , kenneth , civilisation , page 313 . harper and row , 1969 . however , delacroix was given to neither sentimentality nor bombast , and his romanticism was that of an individualist . in the words of baudelaire , '' delacroix was passionately in love with passion , but coldly determined to express passion as clearly as possible . '' wellington , hubert , the journal of eugène delacroix , introduction , page xiv . cornell university press , 1980 . together with ingres , delacroix is considered one of the last old masters of painting , and one of the few who was ever photographed . as a painter and muralist , delacroix 's use of expressive brushstrokes and his study of the optical effects of colour profoundly shaped the work of the impressionisms , while his passion for the exotic inspired the artists of the symbolist movement . a fine lithographer , delacroix illustrated various works of william shakespeare , the scottish author walter scott and the german author johann wolfgang von goethe .