the war of the first coalition is a set of wars that several european powers fought between 1792 and 1797 against initially the kingdom of france ( 1791-92 ) and then the french republic that succeeded it . they were only loosely allied and fought without much apparent coordination or agreement ; each power had its eye on a different part of france it wanted to appropriate after a french defeat , which never occurred . noah shusterman – de franse revolutie ( the french revolution ) . veen media , amsterdam , 2015 . ( translation of : the french revolution . faith , desire , and politics . routledge , london/new york , 2014 . ) chapter 7 ( p . 271–312 ) : the federalist revolts , the vendée and the beginning of the terror ( summer–fall 1793 ) . relations between the french revolutionaries with neighbouring monarchies had deteriorated following the declaration of pillnitz in august 1791 . eight months later , louis xvi and the legislative assembly , france declared war on austria on 20 april 1792 ; prussia , having allied with austria in february , declared war on france in june 1792 . in july 1792 , an army under the duke of brunswick and composed mostly of prussians joined the austrian side and invaded france . the capture of verdun ( 2 september 1792 ) triggered the september massacres in paris . france counterattacked with battle of valmy ( 20 september ) and two days later the legislative assembly , flushed with victory , proclaimed the french republic . subsequently , these powers made several invasions of france by land and sea , with prussia and austria attacking from the austrian netherlands and the rhine , and the kingdom of great britain supporting revolts in provincial france and laying siege of toulon background . france suffered reverses ( battle of neerwinden , 18 march 1793 ) and internal strife ( war in the vendée ) and responded with draconian measures . the committee of public safety was formed ( 6 april 1793 ) and the levée en masse drafted all potential soldiers aged 18 to 25 ( august 1793 ) . the new french armies counterattacked , repelled the invaders , and advanced beyond france . the french established the batavian republic as a sister republic ( may 1795 ) and gained prussian recognition of french control of the left bank of the rhine by the first peace of basel . with the treaty of campo formio , the holy roman empire ceded the austrian netherlands to france and northern italy was turned into several french sister republics . spain made a separate peace accord with france ( second treaty of basel ) and the french directory carried out plans to conquer more of the holy roman empire . north of the alps , archduke charles , duke of teschen redressed the situation in 1796 , but napoleon carried all before him against sardinia and austria in northern italy ( 1796–1797 ) near the po valley , culminating in the treaty of leoben and the treaty of campo formio ( october 1797 ) . the first coalition collapsed , leaving only britain in the field fighting against france .