the arab socialist baʽath party was a political party founded in syria by michel aflaq , salah al-din al-bitar , and associates of zaki al-arsuzi . the party espoused baʽathism ( from arabic baʽth meaning '' renaissance '' or '' resurrection '' ) , which is an ideology mixing arab nationalism , pan-arabism , arab socialism , and anti-imperialism interests . baʽathism calls for unification of the arab world into a single state . its motto , '' unity , liberty , socialism '' , refers to arab unity , and freedom from non-arab control and interference . the party was founded by the merger of the arab baʽath movement , led by aflaq and al-bitar , and the arab baʽath , led by al-arsuzi , on 7 april 1947 as the arab baʽath party . the party quickly established branches in other arab countries , although it would only hold power in iraq and syria . the arab baʽath party merged with the arab socialist movement , led by akram al-hawrani , in 1952 to form the arab socialist baʽath party . the newly formed party was a relative success , and became the second-largest party in the syrian parliament in the 1954 election . this , coupled with the increasing strength of the syrian communist party , led to the establishment of the united arab republic ( uar ) , a union of egypt and syria . the union would prove unsuccessful , and a syrian coup in 1961 dissolved it . following the break-up of the uar , the baʽath party was reconstituted . however , during the uar , military activists had established the military committee to take control of the baʽath party from civilian hands . in the meantime , in iraq , the local baʽath party branch had taken power by orchestrating and leading the ramadan revolution , only to november 1963 iraqi coup d'état . the military committee , with aflaq 's consent , took power in syria in the 1963 syrian coup d'état of 1963 . a power struggle quickly developed between the civilian faction led by aflaq , al-bitar , and munif razzaz and the military committee led by salah jadid and hafez al-assad . as relations between the two factions deteriorated , the military committee initiated the 1966 syrian coup d'état , which ousted the national command led by al-razzaz , aflaq , and their supporters . the 1966 coup split the baʽath party between the iraqi-dominated baʽath movement and the syrian-dominated baʽath movement .