soundies are three-minute american musical films , produced between 1940 and 1947 , each displaying a song , dance , and/or band or orchestral number . produced professionally on 35mm black-and-white film , like theatrical motion pictures , they were printed in the more portable and economical 16mm gauge . the films were shown in a coin-operated '' movie jukebox '' named the panoram , manufactured by the mills novelty company of chicago . each panoram housed a 16mm rca film projector , with eight soundies films threaded in an endless-loop arrangement . a system of mirrors flashed the image from the lower half of the cabinet onto a front-facing screen in the top half . each film cost 10 cents to play , and there was no choice of song ; the patron saw whatever film was next in the queue . panorams could be found in public amusement centers , nightclubs , taverns , restaurants , and factory lounges , and the films were changed weekly . the completed soundies were generally made available within a few weeks of their filming , by the soundies distributing corporation of america . several production companies filmed the soundies shorts in new york , hollywood , and chicago : james roosevelt 's globe productions ( 1940–41 ) , cinemasters ( 1940–41 ) , minoco productions ( owned by mills novelty , 1941–43 ) , '' honeysuckle rose '' sung by fats waller in a 1941 minoco production soundie ( video ) rcm productions ( 1941–46 ) , lol productions ( 1943 ) , glamourettes ( 1943 ) , filmcraft productions ( 1943–46 ) , and alexander productions ( 1946 ) . scott macgillivray and ted okuda , the soundies book : a revised and expanded guide , iuniverse , 2007 ; the performers would record the music in advance , and mime to the soundtrack during filming . the movie-jukebox idea developed several imitations and variations of the technical design ; the most successful of these imitators were the techniprocess company ( managed by rudy vallee ) and the featurettes company , which used original novelty songs and usually unknown talent ( 17-year-old gwen verdon appears in a couple of the featurettes , as '' gwen verdun '' ) . as soundies quickly gained most of the market for jukebox films , the other companies disbanded , and some sold their films to the soundies concern .