rustin '' faded from the shortlist of well-known civil rights lions '' , in part because he was active behind the scenes , and also because of public discomfort with his sexual orientation and former communist membership . in addition , rustin 's tilt toward neo-conservatism in the late 1960s led him into disagreement with most civil rights leaders . but , the 2003 documentary film brother outsider : the life of bayard rustin , a sundance festival grand jury prize nominee , and the march 2012 centennial of rustin 's birth have contributed to renewed recognition of his extensive contributions . rustin served as chairman of social democrats , usa , which , the washington post wrote in 2013 , '' was a breeding ground for many neoconservatism '' . dylan matthews , '' meet bayard rustin '' , washingtonpost.com , august 28 , 2013 in the 1970s , he was among the second-age neoconservatives , and in 1979 , was elevated to vice-chair of the coalition for a democratic majority , an organization that helped revive the committee on the present danger . justin vaïsse , neoconservatism : the biography of a movement ( harvard university press , 2010 ) , p . 91 '' coalition for a democratic majority '' , right web , institute for policy studies according to daniel richman , former clerk for united states supreme court justice thurgood marshall , marshall 's friendship with rustin , who was open about his homosexuality , played a significant role in marshall 's dissent from the court 's 5–4 decision upholding the constitutionality of state sodomy laws in the later overturned 1986 case bowers v . hardwick . several buildings have been named in honor of rustin , including the bayard rustin educational complex located in chelsea , manhattan ; '' h.s . 440 bayard rustin educational complex '' at insideschools.org bayard rustin high school in his hometown of west chester , pennsylvania ; bayard rustin library at the affirmations gay/lesbian community center in ferndale , michigan ; the bayard rustin social justice center in conway , arkansas , and the bayard rustin center for social justice in princeton , new jersey . rustin is one of two men who have both participated in the penn relays and had a school , west chester rustin high school , named in his honor that participates in the relays .