business intelligence ( bi ) comprises the strategies and technologies used by enterprises for the data analysis of business information . bi technologies provide historical , current , and predictive views of business operations . common functions of business intelligence technologies include reporting , online analytical processing , analytics , dashboard development , data mining , process mining , complex event processing , business performance management , benchmarking , text mining , predictive analysis , and prescriptive analytics . bi technologies can handle large amounts of structured and sometimes unstructured data to help identify , develop , and otherwise create new strategic business opportunities . they aim to allow for the easy interpretation of these big data . identifying new opportunities and implementing an effective strategy based on insights can provide businesses with a competitive market advantage and long-term stability . business intelligence can be used by enterprises to support a wide range of business decisions ranging from operational to strategic . basic operating decisions include product positioning or pricing . business strategy decisions involve priorities , goals , and directions at the broadest level . in all cases , bi is most effective when it combines data derived from the market in which a company operates ( external data ) with data from company sources internal to the business such as financial and operations data ( internal data ) . when combined , external and internal data can provide a complete picture which , in effect , creates an '' intelligence '' that can not be derived from any singular set of data . among myriad uses , business intelligence tools empower organizations to gain insight into new markets , to assess demand and suitability of products and services for different market segments , and to gauge the impact of marketing efforts . chugh , r & grandhi , s 2013 , 'why business intelligence ? significance of business intelligence tools and integrating bi governance with corporate governance ' , international journal of e-entrepreneurship and innovation , vol . 4 , no.2 , pp . 1-14 . bi applications use data gathered from a data warehouse ( dw ) or from a data mart , and the concepts of bi and dw combine as '' bi/dw '' or as '' bidw '' . a data warehouse contains a copy of analytical data that facilitate decision support .