in accounting , fixed capital is any kind of real , physical asset that is used repeatedly in the production of a product . in economics , fixed capital is a type of capital good that as a real , physical asset is used as a means of production which is durable or is n't fully consumed in a single time period . varri p . ( 1987 ) fixed capital . in : durlauf s . , blume l . ( eds ) the new palgrave dictionary of economics . palgrave macmillan , london . '' fixed capital '' , the new palgrave : a dictionary of economics , 1st edition . it contrasts with circulating capital such as raw materials , operating expenses etc . the concept was first theoretically analyzed in some depth-first by the economist adam smith in the wealth of nations ( 1776 ) and then by david ricardo in on the principles of political economy and taxation ( 1821 ) . ricardo studied the use of machines in place of labor and concluded that workers ' fear of technology replacing them might be justified . thus fixed capital is that portion of the total capital outlay that is invested in fixed assets ( such as land improvements , buildings , vehicles , plant , and equipment ) , that stay in the business almost permanently—or at the very least , for more than one accounting period . fixed assets can be purchased by a business , in which case the business owns them . they can also be leased , hired or rented , if that is cheaper or more convenient , or if owning the fixed asset is practically impossible ( for legal or technical reasons ) . refining the classical distinction between fixed and circulating capital in das kapital , karl marx emphasizes that the distinction is really purely relative , i.e . it refers only to the comparative rotation speeds ( turnover time ) of different types of physical capital assets . fixed capital also '' circulates '' , except that the circulation time is much longer , because a fixed asset may be held for 5 , 10 or 20 years before it has yielded its value and is discarded for its salvage value . a fixed asset may also be resold and re-used , which often happens with vehicles and planes . in national accounts , fixed capital is conventionally defined as the stock of tangible , durable fixed assets owned or used by resident enterprises for more than one year . this includes plant , machinery , vehicles and equipment , installations and physical infrastructures , the value of land improvements , and buildings . the european system of national and regional accounts ( esa95 ) explicitly includes produced intangible assets ( e.g . mineral exploitation , computer software , copyright protected entertainment , literary and artistics originals ) within the definition of fixed assets . land itself is not included in the statistical concept of fixed capital , even though it is a fixed asset . the main reason is that land is not regarded as a product ( a reproducible good ) . but the value of land improvements is included in the statistical concept of fixed capital , is regarded as the creation of value-added through production .