terracotta , terra cotta , or terra-cotta ; italian : '' baked earth '' , from the latin terra cocta ) , '' terracotta '' , p . 341 , delahunty , andrew , from bonbon to cha-cha : oxford dictionary of foreign words and phrases , 2008 , oup oxford , , 9780199543694 a type of earthenware , is a clay-based unglazed or glazed ceramic , oed , '' terracotta '' ; '' terracotta '' , mfa boston , '' cameo '' database where the fired body is porous . terracotta is the term normally used for sculpture made in earthenware , and also for various practical uses including vessels ( notably flower pots ) , water and waste water pipes , tile , bricks , and surface embellishment in building construction . 'industrial ceramics . ' f.singer , s.s.singer . chapman & hall . 1971 . quote : '' the lighter pieces that are glazed may also be termed 'terracotta . ' the term is also used to refer to the natural terra cotta ( color ) of most terracotta , which varies considerably . this article covers the senses of terracotta as a medium in sculpture , as in the terracotta army and greek terracotta figurines , and architectural decoration . east asian and european sculpture in porcelain is not covered . glazed architectural terracotta and its unglazed version as exterior surfaces for buildings were used in east asia for some centuries before becoming popular in the west in the 19th century . architectural terracotta can also refer to decorated ceramic elements such as antefixes and revetments , which made a large contribution to the appearance of temples and other buildings in the classical architecture of europe , as well as in the ancient near east . in archaeology and art history , '' terracotta '' is often used to describe objects such as figurines not made on a potter 's wheel . vessels and other objects that are or might be made on a wheel from the same material are called earthenware pottery ; the choice of term depends on the type of object rather than the material or firing technique . peek , philip m . , and yankah , african folklore : an encyclopedia , 2004 , routledge , , 9781135948726 , google books unglazed pieces , and those made for building construction and industry , are also more likely to be referred to as terracotta , whereas tableware and other vessels are called earthenware ( though sometimes terracotta if unglazed ) , or by a more precise term such as faience .