saint valentine , , known as saint valentine of rome , was a 3rd-century roman saint , commemorated in western christianity on february 14 and in eastern orthodoxy on july 6 . from the high middle ages his saints ' day has been associated with a tradition of courtly love . he is also a patron saint of terni , epilepsy and beekeeping . saint valentine was a clergymaneither a priest or a bishopin the roman empire who ministered to persecuted christians . . he was martyred and his body buried on the hill of terni on the via flaminia near a necropolis , on february 14 , which has been observed as the feast of saint valentine ( saint valentine 's day ) since 496 ad . a basilica was built on the site in the fourth century in which the remains of the saint are currently kept , enclosed in a reliquary : it seems that they were brought to the city by the three disciples of the philosopher cratone , apollonio , efebo and procuro , converted by the future saint and that for this reason they were martyred . these are the relics of the bishop of terni . since 1936 , thanks to the then bishop of the diocese sarno-cava , msgr . pasquale dell'isola , the city of san valentino torio holds some relics of the patron saint of lovers . his skull , crowned with flowers , is exhibited in the basilica of santa maria in cosmedin , rome . other relics of him were taken to whitefriar street carmelite church in dublin , ireland , where they remain ; this house of worship continues to be a popular place of pilgrimage , especially on saint valentine 's day , for those seeking love . for saint valentine of terni , i.e . saint valentine of rome , '' abstracts of the acts of the saint were in nearly every church and monastery of europe '' , according to professor jack b . oruch of the university of kansas . the roman martyrology has preserved the memory of another saint named valentine , a presbyter and martyr , whose relics are kept in different locations . saint valentine is commemorated in the anglican communion and the lutheranism on february 14 . in the eastern orthodox church , he is recognized on july 6 ; in addition , the eastern orthodox church observes the feast of hieromartyr valentine , bishop of interamna , on july 30 . coptic orthodox church – from where valentine 's day comes from in 1969 , the roman catholic church removed his name from the general roman calendar , leaving his liturgical celebration to local calendars , though use of the pre-1970 liturgical calendar is also authorized under the conditions indicated in the motu proprio summorum pontificum of 2007 . calendarium romanum libreria editrice vaticana ( 1969 ) , p . 117 the roman catholic church continues to recognize him as a saint , listing him as such in the february 14 entry in the roman martyrology , roman martyrology , libreria editrice vaticana , 2001 , p . 141 and authorizing liturgical veneration of him on february 14 in any place where that day is not devoted to some other obligatory celebration , in accordance with the rule that on such a day the mass may be that of any saint listed in the martyrology for that day . general instruction of the roman missal , 355