sábado gigante ( english translation : '' giant saturday '' or '' gigantic saturday '' ; known officially as sábado gigante internacional outside chile ) was a spanish language television program broadcast by spanish international network in the united states . it was also univision 's longest-running program and the longest-running television variety series in world television history . sábado gigante was an eclectic and frenetic mix of various contests , human-interest stories , and live entertainment . from its start in 1962 , it was hosted by chilean tv star mario kreutzberger under the stage name of don francisco . rolando barral began serving as a co-host in 1986 ; that role was taken over by javier romero in 1991 . the three-hour program aired on univision each saturday night at 8:00 & nbsp ; p.m . ( 7:00 & nbsp ; p.m . from 1987-2001 ) . a new episode was produced every week throughout the show 's history , with no reruns and only rare pre-emptions due to special programming ( most notably by teletón usa , an annual 24-hour telethon held each december , which kreutzberger has hosted since its inception in 2012 ) . on april 17 , 2015 , univision announced that sábado gigante would end after 53 years , with its final episode ( titled sábado gigante : hasta siempre ; english translation : '' giant saturday : farewell '' or '' gigantic saturday : farewell '' ) airing on september 19 , 2015 . for the first time during the show 's run , the final episode aired live in chile , mexico and the u.s . after the finale , univision replaced it with a prerecorded mexican show , sabadazo , which premiered on october 30 , 2010 , on televisa and september 2012 on univision . it was later replaced with crónicas de sábado and sal y pimienta on univision as sabadazo was moved back to its original afternoon time slot ( both shows were later replaced by 2-3 liga mx football matches broadcast on the network under the name sábado futbolero broadcast during that league 's season ; sabadazo was then cancelled in 2015 ) .