the lipid bilayer ( or phospholipid bilayer ) is a thin polar membrane made of two layers of lipid molecules . these membranes are flat sheets that form a continuous barrier around all cells . the cell membranes of almost all organisms and many viruses are made of a lipid bilayer , as are the nuclear envelope surrounding the cell nucleus , and membranes of the organelle in the cell . the lipid bilayer is the barrier that keeps ions , proteins and other molecules where they are needed and prevents them from diffusing into areas where they should not be . lipid bilayers are ideally suited to this role , even though they are only a few nanometers in width , because they are impermeable to most water-soluble ( hydrophilic ) molecules . bilayers are particularly impermeable to ions , which allows cells to regulate salt concentrations and ph by transporting ions across their membranes using proteins called ion pumps . biological bilayers are usually composed of amphiphile phospholipids that have a hydrophilic phosphate head and a hydrophobic tail consisting of two fatty acid chains . phospholipids with certain head groups can alter the surface chemistry of a bilayer and can , for example , serve as signals as well as '' anchors '' for other molecules in the membranes of cells . just like the heads , the tails of lipids can also affect membrane properties , for instance by determining the phase of the bilayer . the bilayer can adopt a solid gel phase state at lower temperatures but undergo phase transition to a fluids at higher temperatures , and the chemical properties of the lipids ' tails influence at which temperature this happens . the packing of lipids within the bilayer also affects its mechanical properties , including its resistance to stretching and bending . many of these properties have been studied with the use of artificial '' model '' bilayers produced in a lab . vesicles made by model bilayers have also been used clinically to deliver drugs . biological membranes typically include several types of molecules other than phospholipids . a particularly important example in animal cells is cholesterol , which helps strengthen the bilayer and decrease its permeability . cholesterol also helps regulate the activity of certain integral membrane proteins . integral membrane proteins function when incorporated into a lipid bilayer , and they are held tightly to the lipid bilayer with the help of an annular lipid shell . because bilayers define the boundaries of the cell and its compartments , these membrane proteins are involved in many intra- and inter-cellular signaling processes . certain kinds of membrane proteins are involved in the process of fusing two bilayers together . this fusion allows the joining of two distinct structures as in the acrosome reaction during fertilization of an egg by a sperm , or the entry of a virus into a cell . because lipid bilayers are fragile and invisible in a traditional microscope , they are a challenge to study . experiments on bilayers often require advanced techniques like electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy .