the turbojet is an airbreathing jet engine , typically used in aircraft . it consists of a gas turbine with a propelling nozzle . the gas turbine has an air inlet , a compressor , a combustion chamber , and a turbine ( that drives the compressor ) . the compressed air from the compressor is heated by burning fuel in the combustion chamber and then allowed to expand through the turbine . the turbine exhaust is then expanded in the propelling nozzle where it is accelerated to high speed to provide thrust . two engineers , frank whittle in the united kingdom and hans von ohain in germany , developed the concept independently into practical engines during the late 1930s . while the turbojet was the first form of gas turbine powerplant for aviation , it has largely been replaced in use by other developments of the original concept . in operation , turbojets typically generate thrust by accelerating a relatively small amount of air to very high supersonic speeds , whereas turbofans accelerate a larger amount of air to lower transonic speeds . turbojets have been replaced in slower aircraft by turboprops because they have better specific fuel consumption . at medium to high speeds , where the propeller is no longer efficient , turboprops have been replaced by turbofans . at these transonic speeds , the turbofan is quieter and has better range-specific fuel consumption than the turbojet . turbojets can be highly efficient for supersonic aircraft . turbojets have poor efficiency at low vehicle speeds , which limits their usefulness in vehicles other than aircraft . turbojet engines have been used in isolated cases to power vehicles other than aircraft , typically for attempts on land speed records . where vehicles are '' turbine-powered '' , this is more commonly by use of a turboshaft engine , a development of the gas turbine engine where an additional turbine is used to drive a rotating output shaft . these are common in helicopters and hovercraft . turbojets were used on concorde and the longer-range versions of the tu-144 which were required to spend a long period travelling supersonically . turbojets are still common in medium range cruise missiles , due to their high exhaust speed , small frontal area , and relative simplicity . they are also still used on some supersonic fighters such as the mig-25 , but most spend little time travelling supersonically , and so employ turbofans and use afterburners to raise exhaust speed for supersonic sprints .