abbreviated as ovs ) was an independent boer sovereign republic under british suzerainty in southern africa during the second half of the 19th century , which ceased to exist after it was defeated and surrendered to the british empire at the end of the second boer war in 1902 . it is one of the three historical precursors to the present-day free state province . extending between the orange and vaal rivers , its borders were determined by the united kingdom of great britain and ireland in 1848 when the region was proclaimed as the orange river sovereignty , with a british resident based in bloemfontein . bloemfontein and the southern parts of the sovereignty had previously been settled by griqua and by trekboere from the cape colony . the voortrekker natalia republic , founded in 1837 , administered the northern part of the territory through a landdrost based at winburg . this northern area was later in federation with the republic of potchefstroom which eventually formed part of the south african republic ( transvaal ) . following the granting of sovereignty to the transvaal republic , the british recognised the independence of the orange river sovereignty and the country officially became independent as the orange free state on 23 february 1854 , with the signing of the orange river convention . the new republic incorporated the orange river sovereignty and continued the traditions of the winburg-potchefstroom republic . the orange free state developed into a politically and economically successful republic and for the most part enjoyed good relationships with its neighbours . it was annexed as the orange river colony in 1900 . it ceased to exist as an independent boer republic on 31 may 1902 with the signing of the treaty of vereeniging at the conclusion of the second boer war . following a period of direct rule by the british , it attained self-government in 1907 and joined the union of south africa in 1910 as the orange free state province , along with the cape province , natal , and the transvaal . in 1961 , the union of south africa became the republic of south africa . the republic 's name derives partly from the orange river , which in turn was named in honour of the dutch ruling family , the house of orange , by the dutch explorer robert jacob gordon . the official language in the orange free state was dutch .