women 's suffrage is the women 's rights to suffrage . beginning in the mid-19th century , aside from the work being done by women for broad-based economic and political equality and for social reforms , women sought to change voting laws to allow them to vote . history of woman suffrage national and international organizations formed to coordinate efforts towards that objective , especially the international alliance of women ( founded in 1904 in berlin , germany ) , as well as for equal civil rights for women . allison sneider ( july 2010 ) , '' the new suffrage history : voting rights in international perspective '' . history compass 8 7 pp . 692–703 . many instances occurred in recent centuries where women were selectively given , then stripped of , the right to vote . the first province in the world to award and maintain women 's suffrage continuously , was pitcairn islands in 1838 , and the first sovereign nation was norway in 1913 , as the kingdom of hawai ' i , which originally had universal suffrage in 1840 , rescinded this in 1852 and was subsequently annexed by the united states in 1898 . in the years after 1869 , a number of provinces held by the british and russian empires conferred women 's suffrage , and some of these became sovereign nations at a later point , like new zealand , australia , and finland . women who owned property gained the right to vote in the isle of man in 1881 , and in 1893 , women in the then self-governing british colony of new zealand were granted the right to vote . in australia , non-aboriginal women progressively gained the right to vote between 1894 and 1911 ( federally in 1902 ) . prior to independence , in the russian grand duchy of finland , women were the first in the world to gain racially-equal suffrage , with both the right to vote and to stand as candidates in 1906 . brief history of the finnish parliament finland 's parliament : pioneer of gender equality most major western powers extended voting rights to women in the interwar period , including canada ( 1917 ) , britain and germany ( 1918 ) , austria and the netherlands ( 1919 ) and the united states ( 1920 ) . notable exceptions in europe were france , where women could not vote until 1944 , greece ( equal voting rights for women did not exist there until 1952 , although , since 1930 , literate women were able to vote in local elections ) , and switzerland ( where , since 1971 , women could vote at the federal level , and between 1959 and 1990 , women got the right to vote at the local canton level ) . since saudi arabia granted voting rights to women ( 2015 ) , women can vote in every country that has elections . leslie hume argues that the first world war changed the popular mood : the women 's contribution to the war effort challenged the notion of women 's physical and mental inferiority and made it more difficult to maintain that women were , both by constitution and temperament , unfit to vote . if women could work in munitions factories , it seemed both ungrateful and illogical to deny them a place in the voting booth . but the vote was much more than simply a reward for war work ; the point was that women 's participation in the war helped to dispel the fears that surrounded women 's entry into the public arena . extended political campaigns by women and their supporters have generally been necessary to gain legislation or constitutional amendments for women 's suffrage . in many countries , limited suffrage for women was granted before universal suffrage for men ; for instance , literate women or property owners were granted suffrage before all men received it . the united nations encouraged women 's suffrage in the years following world war ii , and the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women ( 1979 ) identifies it as a basic right with 189 countries currently being parties to this convention .