dual ( abbreviated is a grammatical number that some languages use in addition to singular and plural . when a noun or pronoun appears in dual form , it is interpreted as referring to precisely two of the entities ( objects or persons ) identified by the noun or pronoun acting as a single unit or in unison . verbs can also have dual agreement forms in these languages . the dual number existed in proto-indo-european , persisted in many of its descendants , such as ancient greek and sanskrit , which have dual forms across nouns , verbs , and adjectives , gothic , which used dual forms in pronouns and verbs , and old english ( anglo-saxon ) , which used dual forms in pronouns . it can still be found in a few modern indo-european languages such as irish , scottish gaelic , lithuanian , slovene , and sorbian languages . the majority of modern indo-european languages , including modern english , however , have lost dual through their development and only show residual traces of it . in all these languages , its function has been replaced by simple plural , as is evident in the english distinctions : both vs . all , either vs . any , neither vs . none , and so on . a commonly used sentence to exemplify dual in english is '' both go to the same school . '' where both refers to two specific people who had already been determined in the conversation . many semitic languages also have dual numbers . for instance , in hebrew יים- ( -ayim ) or a variation of it is added to the end of some nouns , e.g . some parts of the body ( eye , ear , nostril , lip , hand , leg ) and some time periods ( minute , hour , day , week , month , year ) to indicate that it is dual ( regardless of how the plural is formed ) . a similar situation exists in classical arabic , where is added to the end of any noun to indicate that it is dual ( regardless of how the plural is formed ) . it is also present in those khoisan languages that have a rich inflectional morphology , particularly khoe languages .