laissez-faire ; ; from is an economic system in which transactions between private groups of people are free from or almost free from any form of economic interventionism such as regulation and subsidy . as a system of thought , laissez-faire rests on the axioms that the individual is the basic unit in society and has a natural right to freedom ; that the physical order of nature is a harmonious and self-regulating system ; and that corporations are creatures of the state and therefore the citizens must watch them closely due to their propensity to disrupt the smithian spontaneous order . adam smith , wealth of nations , p . 52 : '' the exclusive privileges of corporations , statutes of apprenticeship , and all those laws which restrain , in particular employments , the competition to a smaller number than might otherwise go into them , have the same tendency , though in a less degree . they are a sort of enlarged monopolies , and may frequently , for ages together , and in whole classes of employments , keep up the market price of particular commodities above the natural price , and maintain both the wages of the labour and the profits of the stock employed about them somewhat above their natural rate . '' these axioms constitute the basic elements of laissez-faire thought . another basic principle holds that markets should be competitive , a rule that the early advocates of laissez-faire always emphasized . with the aims of maximizing freedom and of allowing markets to self-regulate , early advocates of laissez-faire proposed a impôt unique , a land value tax ( similar to georgism ) to replace all taxes that they saw as damaging welfare by penalizing production . proponents of laissez-faire argue for a complete separation of government from the economic sector . quick reference handbook set , basic knowledge and modern technology ( revised ) by edward h . litchfield , ph.d the phrase laissez-faire is part of a larger french phrase and literally translates to '' let it/them do '' , but in this context the phrase usually means to '' let it be '' and in expression '' laid back . '' '' laissez-faire '' , business dictionary . laissez-faire capitalism started being practiced in the mid-18th century and was further popularized by adam smith 's book the wealth of nations . edward h . litchfield . '' quick reference handbook set , basic knowledge and modern technology '' ( revised ed . ) . it has been most prominent in britain and the united states in the 19th century . while associated with capitalism in common usage , there are also non-capitalist forms of laissez-faire , including some forms of market socialism .