the nickel–cadmium battery ( ni-cd battery or nicad battery ) is a type of rechargeable battery using nickel oxide hydroxide and metallic cadmium as electrodes . the abbreviation ni-cd is derived from the chemical symbols of nickel ( ni ) and cadmium ( cd ) : the abbreviation nicad is a registered trademark of saft groupe s.a . , although this brand name is commonly used to describe all ni–cd batteries . wet-cell nickel-cadmium batteries were invented in 1899 . among rechargeable battery technologies , ni-cd rapidly lost market share in the 1990s , to nimh and li-ion batteries ; market share dropped by 80 % . a ni-cd battery has a terminal voltage during discharge of around 1.2 volts which decreases little until nearly the end of discharge . the maximum electromotive force offered by a ni-cd cell is 1.3v . ni-cd batteries are made in a wide range of sizes and capacities , from portable sealed types interchangeable with carbon-zinc dry cells , to large ventilated cells used for standby power and motive power . compared with other types of rechargeable cells they offer good cycle life and performance at low temperatures with a fair capacity but their significant advantage is the ability to deliver practically their full rated capacity at high discharge rates ( discharging in one hour or less ) . however , the materials are more costly than that of the lead–acid battery , and the cells have high self-discharge rates . sealed ni-cd cells were at one time widely used in portable power tools , photography equipment , flashlights , emergency lighting , hobby r/c , and portable electronic devices . the superior capacity of nickel-metal hydride batteries , and recent lower cost , has largely supplanted ni-cd use . further , the environmental impact of the disposal of the toxic metal cadmium has contributed considerably to the reduction in their use . within the european union , ni-cd batteries can now only be supplied for replacement purposes or for certain types of new equipment such as medical devices . larger ventilated wet cell ni-cd batteries are used in emergency lighting , standby power , and uninterruptible power supply and other applications .