hms endeavour , also known as hm bark endeavour , was a british royal navy research vessel that lieutenant james cook commanded to australia and new zealand on his first voyage of discovery from 1768 to 1771 . she was launched in 1764 as the collier earl of pembroke , with the navy purchasing her in 1768 for a scientific mission to the pacific ocean and to explore the seas for the surmised terra australis or '' unknown southern land '' . commissioned as his majesty 's bark endeavour , she departed plymouth in august 1768 , rounded cape horn and reached tahiti in time to observe the 1769 transit of venus across the sun . she then set sail into the largely uncharted ocean to the south , stopping at the islands of huahine , bora bora , and raiatea west of tahiti to allow cook to claim them for great britain . in september 1769 , she anchored off new zealand , becoming the first european vessel to reach the islands since abel tasman 's heemskerck 127 years earlier . in april 1770 , endeavour became the first european ship to reach the east coast of australia , with cook going ashore at what is now known as botany bay . endeavour then sailed north along the australian coast next stopping at the now-town of seventeen seventy/agnes water in late may 1770 . she narrowly avoided disaster after running aground on the great barrier reef , and cook had to throw her guns overboard to lighten her . endeavour was beached on the australian mainland for seven weeks to permit rudimentary repairs to her hull . resuming her voyage , she limped into port in batavia in october 1770 , her crew sworn to secrecy about the lands that they had visited . from batavia endeavour continued westward , rounded the cape of good hope on 13 march 1771 and reached the english port of dover on 12 july , having been at sea for nearly three years . the ship was largely forgotten after her epic pacific voyage , spending the next three years hauling troops and cargo to and from the falkland islands . she was renamed lord sandwich in 1775 after being sold into private hands , and used to transport timber from the baltic . rehired as a british troop transport during the american war of independence , she was finally scuttled in a blockade of narragansett bay , rhode island in 1778 . the wreck has not been precisely located but is thought to be one of a cluster of five in newport harbor . relics from endeavour are displayed at maritime museums worldwide , including an anchor and six of her cannon . a replica of endeavour was launched in 1994 and is berthed alongside the australian national maritime museum in sydney harbour . the nasa space shuttle endeavour was named after this ship , john f . kennedy space center – space shuttle endeavour . pao.ksc.nasa.gov . retrieved on 2012-05-20 . as was the command module of apollo 15 , which took a small piece of wood from cook 's ship into space , and the spacex crew dragon capsule c206 was christened endeavour during demo-2 . she is also depicted on the new zealand fifty-cent coin .