the chelmer and blackwater navigation is the canalisation of the rivers chelmer and blackwater in essex , in the east of england . the navigation runs for from springfield basin in chelmsford to the sea lock at heybridge basin near maldon . initial plans faced spirited opposition from maldon , which were overcome by avoiding the town and teminating at heybridge , and the navigation opened in 1797 . there were some teething problems , and the engineer john rennie was called back on two occasions to recommend improvements . the impact of the railways was less severe than on many canals , as there was never a direct line between chelmsford and maldon . the sea lock at heybridge was enlarged after the second world war , but trade gradually declined and ceased in 1972 . unlike most canals , it was not nationalised in 1948 , and remained under the control of the original company . the first leisure boats to use the navigation did so in 1973 , when the inland waterways association organised a rally at chelmsford . springfield basin was restored in 1992 , but the proprietors faced bankrupcy in 2003 , and after two years of negotiation , essex waterways ltd , a wholly owned subsidiary of the inland waterways association , took over responsibility for management , although the proprietors retained ownership . because essex and suffolk water abstract water from the navigation to supply hanningfield reservoir , they have a statutory obligation to maintain the outer gates at heybridge sea lock , to prevent salt water entering the drinking water supply . they undertook major refurbishment work at the lock during the winters of 2016/17 and 2017/18 , including replacement of the outer sea gate with a new design . a long-standing ambition , first proposed in 1985 , has been to provide a better destination at chelmsford , by providing access for boats to the town centre . a proposed link from springfield basin has been thwarted by road building in the area , but a plan to replace the automatic weir below chelmsford town centre with a new structure incorporating a navigation lock was recommended in 2020 .