headphones are a pair of small loudspeaker drivers worn on or around the head over a user 's ears . they are electroacoustic transducers , which convert an electrical signal to a corresponding sound . headphones let a single user listen to an audio source privately , in contrast to a loudspeaker , which emits sound into the open air for anyone nearby to hear . headphones are also known as earspeakers , earphones or , colloquially , cans . stanley r . alten audio basics cengage 2011 page & nbsp ; 63 circumaural ( 'around the ear ' ) and supra-aural ( 'over the ear ' ) headphones use a band over the top of the head to hold the speakers in place . another type , known as earbuds or earpieces consist of individual units that plug into the user 's ear canal . a third type are bone conduction headphones , which typically wrap around the back of the head and rest in front of the ear canal , leaving the ear canal open . in the context of telecommunication , a headset is a combination of headphone and microphone . headphones connect to a signal source such as an audio amplifier , radio , cd player , portable media player , mobile phone , video game console , or electronic musical instrument , either directly using a cord , or using wireless technology such as bluetooth , dect or fm radio . the first headphones were developed in the late 19th century for use by telephone operators , to keep their hands free . initially the audio quality was mediocre and a step forward was the invention of hi fi headphones . headphones are made in a range of different audio reproduction quality capabilities . headsets designed for telephone use typically can not reproduce sound with the high fidelity of expensive units designed for music listening by audiophiles . headphones that use cables typically have either a 1/4 inch ( 6.35mm ) or 1/8 inch ( 3.5mm ) phone jack for plugging the headphones into the audio source . some stereo earbuds are wireless , using bluetooth connectivity to transmit the audio signal by radio waves from source devices like cellphones and digital players . as a result of the walkman effect beginning in the 1980s , headphones started to be used in public places such as sidewalks , grocery stores , and public transit . headphones are also used by people in various professional contexts , such as audio engineers mixing sound for live concerts or sound recordings and djs , who use headphones to cue up the next song without the audience hearing , aircraft pilots and call center employees . the latter two types of employees use headphones with an integrated microphone .