in statistics and control theory , kalman filtering , also known as linear quadratic estimation ( lqe ) , is an algorithm that uses a series of measurements observed over time , containing statistical noise and other inaccuracies , and produces estimates of unknown variables that tend to be more accurate than those based on a single measurement alone , by estimating a joint probability distribution over the variables for each timeframe . the filter is named after rudolf e . k치lm치n , one of the primary developers of its theory . the kalman filter has numerous applications in technology . a common application is for guidance , navigation , and control of vehicles , particularly aircraft , spacecraft and dynamic positioning ships . furthermore , the kalman filter is a widely applied concept in time series analysis used in fields such as signal processing and econometrics . kalman filters also are one of the main topics in the field of robotic motion planning and control and can be used in trajectory optimization . the kalman filter also works for modeling the central nervous system 's control of movement . due to the time delay between issuing motor commands and receiving sensory feedback , use of the kalman filter supports a realistic model for making estimates of the current state of the motor system and issuing updated commands . the algorithm works in a two-step process . in the prediction step , the kalman filter produces estimates of the current state variables , along with their uncertainties . once the outcome of the next measurement ( necessarily corrupted with some amount of error , including random noise ) is observed , these estimates are updated using a weighted mean , with more weight being given to estimates with higher certainty . the algorithm is recursive . it can run in real time , using only the present input measurements and the previously calculated state and its uncertainty matrix ; no additional past information is required . optimality of the kalman filter assumes that the errors are gaussian . in the words of rudolf e . k치lm치n : '' in summary , the following assumptions are made about random processes : physical random phenomena may be thought of as due to primary random sources exciting dynamic systems . the primary sources are assumed to be independent gaussian random processes with zero mean ; the dynamic systems will be linear . '' though regardless of gaussianity , if the process and measurement covariances are known , the kalman filter is the best possible linear estimator in the minimum mean square error . extensions and generalizations to the method have also been developed , such as the extended kalman filter and the unscented kalman filter which work on nonlinear systems . the underlying model is a hidden markov model where the state space of the latent variables is continuous and all latent and observed variables have gaussian distributions . also , kalman filter has been successfully used in sensor fusion , and distributed sensor networks to develop distributed or consensus kalman filter .