is a green-skinned grape variety that originates from the bordeaux region of france . the grape most likely gets its name from the french words sauvage ( '' wild '' ) and blanc ( '' white '' ) due to its early origins as an indigenous grape in south west france . k . macneil the wine bible pg 52 workman publishing 2001 it is possibly a descendant of savagnin . is planted in many of the world 's wine regions , producing a crisp , dry , and refreshing white varietal . the grape is also a component of the famous dessert wines from sauternes and barsac . sauvignon blanc is widely cultivated in france , chile , romania , canada , australia , new zealand , south africa , bulgaria , the states of washington and california in the us . some new world sauvignon blancs , particularly from california , may also be called '' fumé blanc '' , a marketing term coined by robert mondavi in reference to pouilly-fumé . depending on the climate , the flavor can range from aggressively grassy to sweetly tropical . in cooler climates , the grape has a tendency to produce wines with noticeable acidity and '' green flavors '' of grass , green bell peppers and nettles with some tropical fruit ( such as passion fruit ) and floral ( such as elderflower ) notes . in warmer climates , it can develop more tropical fruit notes but risks losing much aroma from ripe ( wine ) , leaving only slight grapefruit and tree fruit ( such as peach ) notes . wine & spirits education trust '' wine and spirits : understanding wine quality '' pgs 6-9 , second revised edition ( 2012 ) , london , wine experts have used the phrase '' crisp , elegant , and fresh '' as a favorable description of sauvignon blanc from the loire valley and new zealand . karen macneil , the wine bible pg 268 workman publishing 2001 materman , '' stuff of legends : marlborough sauvignon blanc . '' sauvignon blanc , when slightly chilled , pairs well with fish or cheese , particularly chèvre . it is also known as one of the few wines that can pair well with sushi . robert joseph and margaret rand , kiss guide to wine dk pub 2000 along with riesling , sauvignon blanc was one of the first fine wines to be bottled with a screwcap in commercial quantities , especially by new zealand producers . the wine is usually consumed young , as it does not particularly benefit from aging , as varietal sauvignon blancs tend to develop vegetal aromas reminiscent of peas and asparagus with extended aging . dry and sweet white bordeaux , including oak-aged examples from pessac-léognan and graves , as well as some loire wines from pouilly-fumé and sancerre are some of the few examples of sauvignon blancs with aging potential . the first friday in may is international sauvignon blanc day .