as of . the listed building main wings ( known as east and west market ) are separated by the grand avenue , a wide roadway roofed by an elliptical arch with decorations in cast iron . at the two ends of the arcade , four prominent statues represent london , edinburgh , liverpool and dublin ; they depict bronze dragons charged with the city 's coat of arms . at the corners of the market , four octagonal pavilion towers were built , each with a dome displaying carved stone griffins . as the market was being built , a cut and cover railway tunnel was constructed underground city street level to create a triangular junction with the railway between blackfriars and kings cross through snow hill tunnel . closed in 1916 , it has been revived and is now used for thameslink rail services . snowhill ( london railways ) accessed 13 april 2009 the construction of extensive railway sidings , beneath smithfield park , facilitated the transfer of animal carcasses to its cool store , and directly up to the meat market via lifts . these sidings closed in the 1960s . they are now used as a car park , accessed via a cobbled descent at the centre of smithfield park . today , much of the meat is delivered to market by road . the first extension of smithfield 's meat market took place between 1873 and 1876 with the construction of the poultry market immediately west of the central market . a rotunda was built at the centre of the old market field ( now west smithfield ) , comprising gardens , a fountain and a ramped carriageway to the station beneath the market building . further buildings were subsequently added to the market . the general market , built between 1879 and 1883 , was intended to replace the old farringdon market located nearby and established for the sale of fruit and vegetables when the earlier fleet market was cleared to enable the laying out of farringdon street between 1826–1830 . a further block ( also known as annexe market or triangular block , ) consisting of two separate structures ( the fish market and the red house ) , was built between 1886 and 1899 . the fish market , built by mowlem , was completed in 1888 , one year after sir horace jones ' death . the red house , with its imposing red brick and portland stone façade , was built between 1898 and 1899 for the london central markets cold storage co . ltd . it was one of the first cool store to be built outside the london docks and continued to serve smithfield market until the mid-1970s .