image : pic microcontrollers.jpg thumb pic microcontrollers in dip and qfn packages thumb image : pic12c508-hd.jpg thumb die of a pic12c508 8-bit , fully static , eeprom/eprom/rom-based cmos microcontroller manufactured by microchip technology using a 1200 nanometre process image : pic16c505-hd.jpg thumb die of a pic16c505 cmos rom-based 8-bit microcontroller manufactured by microchip technology using a 1200 nanometre process pic ( usually pronounced as '' pick '' ) is a family of microcontrollers made by microchip technology , derived from the pic1650 name '' picmicrofamilytree '' > '' picmicro family tree '' , pic16f seminar presentation originally developed by general instrument 's microelectronics division . the name pic initially referred to peripheral interface controller , '' mos data 1976 '' , general instrument 1976 databook and is currently expanded as programmable intelligent computer . '' 1977 data catalog '' , micro electronics from general instrument corporation the first parts of the family were available in 1976 ; by 2013 the company had shipped more than twelve billion individual parts , used in a wide variety of embedded systems . early models of pic had read-only memory ( rom ) or field-programmable eprom for program storage , some with provision for erasing memory . all current models use flash memory for program storage , and newer models allow the pic to reprogram itself . program memory and data memory are separated . data memory is 8-bit , 16-bit , and , in latest models , 32-bit wide . program instructions vary in bit-count by family of pic , and may be 12 , 14 , 16 , or 24 bits long . the instruction set also varies by model , with more powerful chips adding instructions for digital signal processing functions . the hardware capabilities of pic devices range from 6-pin smd , 8-pin dip chips up to 144-pin smd chips , with discrete i/o pins , adc and dac modules , and communications ports such as uart , i2c , can , and even usb . low-power and high-speed variations exist for many types . the manufacturer supplies computer software for development known as mplab , assemblers and c/c++ compilers , and programmer/debugger hardware under the mplab and pickit series . third party and some open-source tools are also available . some parts have in-circuit programming capability ; low-cost development programmers are available as well as high-production programmers . pic devices are popular with both industrial developers and hobbyists due to their low cost , wide availability , large user base , extensive collection of application notes , availability of low cost or free development tools , serial programming , and re-programmable flash-memory capability .