the 120 days of sodom , or the school of libertinage alternatively the school of licentiousness ( les 120 journées de sodome ou l'école du libertinage ) is a novel by the french writer and nobleman marquis de sade . described as both pornography and erotic , it was written in 1785 . it tells the story of four wealthy male libertines who resolve to experience the ultimate sexual pleasure in orgies . to do this , they seal themselves away for four months in an inaccessible castle in the heart of the black forest , with a harem of 36 victims , mostly male and female teenagers , and engage four female brothel keepers to tell the stories of their lives and adventures . the crimes and tortures in the women 's narratives inspire the libertines to similarly abuse and torture their victims , which gradually grows in intensity and ends in their slaughter . the novel was never completed ; it exists mainly in rough draft and note form . sade wrote it in secrecy while imprisoned in the bastille in 1785 ; shortly after he was transferred elsewhere storming of the bastille , leading him to believe the work was destroyed , but it was instead recovered by a mysterious figure and preserved long enough thereafter to become available in the early 20th century . it was not until the latter half of the 20th century that it became more widely available in countries such as the united kingdom , the united states and france . since then , it has been translated into many languages , including english , japanese , spanish , russian , and german . it remains a highly controversial book , having been banned by some governments due to its explicit nature and themes of sexual violence and extreme cruelty , such as in the uk in the 1950s , but remains of significant interest to students and historians . university of melbourne ( 2013 ) . banned books in australia - a special collections-art in the library exhibition . '' retrieved on 2014-12-06 from in 2016 an english translation of the work became a penguin classic .