african music is a tradition mainly played at gatherings at special occasions . the traditional music of africa , given the vastness of the continent , is historically ancient , rich and diverse , with different regions and nations of africa having many distinct musical traditions . music in africa is very important when it comes to religion . songs and music are used in rituals and religious ceremonies , to pass down stories from generation to generation , as well as to sing and dance to . traditional music in most of the continent is passed down orally ( or aurally ) and is not written . in sub-saharan african music traditions , it frequently relies on percussion instruments of every variety , including xylophones , djembes , drums , and tone-producing instruments such as the mbira or '' thumb piano . '' african music has juju , fuji , highlife , makossa , kizomba , afrobeat and other music . the music and dance of the african diaspora , formed to varying degrees on african musical traditions , include american music and many caribbean genres , such as soca , calypso ( see kaiso ) , and zouk . latin american music genres such as bomba , conga , son , rumba , salsa , cumbia , samba , were founded on the music of enslaved africans , and have in turn influenced african popular music . the blues has likely evolved as a fusion of an african bluenote scale with european twelve tone musical instruments . kubik , gerhard , 1934- ( 1999 ) . africa and the blues . jackson , miss . : university press of mississippi . oclc 44959610 like the music of asia , india and the middle east , it is a highly rhythmic music . african music consists of complex rhythmic patterns , often involving one rhythm played against another to create a polyrhythm . the most common polyrhythm plays three beats on top of two , like a triplet played against straight notes . beyond the rhythmic nature of the music , african music differs from western music in that the various parts of the music do not necessarily combine in a harmonious fashion . african musicians aim to express life , in all its aspects , through the medium of sound . african music does not have a written tradition ; there is little or no written music to study or analyze . there are subtle differences in pitch and intonation that do not easily translate to western notation . african music most closely adheres to western tetratonic ( four-note ) , pentatonic ( five-note ) , hexatonic ( six-note ) , and heptatonic ( seven-note ) scales . harmonization of the melody is accomplished by singing in parallel thirds , fourths , or fifths . another distinguishing form of african music is its call-and-response nature : one voice or instrument plays a short melodic phrase , and that phrase is echoed by another voice or instrument . the call-and-response nature extends to the rhythm , where one drum will play a rhythmic pattern , echoed by another drum playing the same pattern . african music is also highly improvised . a core rhythmic pattern is typically played , with drummers then improvising new patterns over the static original patterns .