early islamic philosophy or classical islamic philosophy is a period of intense philosophical development beginning in the 2nd century ah of the islamic calendar ( early 9th century ce ) and lasting until the 6th century ah ( late 12th century ce ) . the period is known as the islamic golden age , and the achievements of this period had a crucial influence in the development of modern philosophy and science . for renaissance , '' muslim maritime , agricultural , and technological innovations , as well as much east asian technology via the muslim world , made their way to western europe in one of the largest technology transfers in world history . ” history of europe - middle ages - reform and renewal - christianity , judaism , and islam , use toc this period starts with al-kindi in the 9th century and ends with averroes ( ibn rushd ) at the end of 12th century . the death of averroes effectively marks the end of a particular discipline of islamic philosophy usually called the peripatetic school , and philosophical activity declined significantly in western muslim world , namely in al-andalus and north africa , though it persisted for much longer in the eastern countries , in particular persia and india where several schools of philosophy continued to flourish : avicennism , illuminationist philosophy , sufi philosophy , and transcendent theosophy . some of the significant achievements of early muslim philosophers included the development of a strict scientific citation , the isnad or '' backing '' ; the development of a scientific method to disprove claims , the ijtihad , which could be generally applied to many types of questions ( although which to apply it to is an ethical question ) ; the willingness to both accept and challenge authority within the same process ; recognition that science and philosophy are both subordinate to morality , and that moral choices should be made prior to any investigation or concern with either ; the separation of theology ( kalam ) and law ( shariah ) during the early abbasid period , a precursor to secularism ; kevin staley ( 1989 ) . '' al-kindi on creation : aristotle 's challenge to islam '' , journal of the history of ideas 50 ( 3 ) , p . 355-370 . the distinction between religion and philosophy , marking the beginning of secularism ; the beginning of a peer review process ; early ideas on evolution ; the beginnings of the scientific method , an important contribution to the philosophy of science ; the introduction of temporal modal logic and inductive logic ; the beginning of social philosophy , including the formulation of theories on social cohesion and social conflict ; the beginning of the philosophy of history ; the development of the philosophical novel and the concepts of empiricism and tabula rasa ; and distinguishing between essence and existence . saadia gaon , david ben merwan al-mukkamas , maimonides , and thomas aquinas , were influenced by the mutazilite work , particularly avicennism and averroism , and the renaissance and the use of empirical methods were inspired at least in part by arabic translations of greek , jewish , persian and egyptian works translated into latin during the renaissance of the 12th century , and taken during the reconquista in 1492 . early islamic philosophy can be divided into clear sets of influences , branches , schools , and fields , as described below .