mind uploading , also known as whole brain emulation ( wbe ) , is the hypothetical futuristic process of scanning a physical structure of the brain accurately enough to create an emulator of the mental state ( including long-term memory and '' self '' ) and copying it to a computer in a digital form . the computer would then run a simulation of the brain 's information processing , such that it would respond in essentially the same way as the original brain and experience having a sentient conscious mind . a framework for approaches to transfer of a mind 's substrate , sim bamford coalescing minds : brain uploading-related group mind scenarios substantial mainstream research in related areas is being conducted in animal brain mapping and simulation , development of faster supercomputers , virtual reality , brain–computer interfaces , connectomics , and information extraction from dynamically functioning brains . according to supporters , many of the tools and ideas needed to achieve mind uploading already exist or are currently under active development ; however , they will admit that others are , as yet , very speculative , but say they are still in the realm of engineering possibility . mind uploading may potentially be accomplished by either of two methods : copy-and-upload or copy-and-delete by gradual replacement of neurons ( which can be considered as a gradual destructive uploading ) , until the original organic brain no longer exists and a computer program emulating the brain takes control over the body . in the case of the former method , mind uploading would be achieved by scanning and mapping the salient features of a biological brain , and then by storing and copying , that information state into a computer system or another computational device . the biological brain may not survive the copying process or may be deliberately destroyed during it in some variants of uploading . the simulated mind could be within a virtual reality or simulated world , supported by an anatomic 3d body simulation model . alternatively the simulated mind could reside in a computer inside ( or either connected to or remotely controlled ) a ( not necessarily humanoid ) robot or a biological or cyborg body . among some futurists and within the part of transhumanism movement , mind uploading is treated as an important proposed life extension technology . some believe mind uploading is humanity 's current best option for preserving the identity of the species , as opposed to cryonics . another aim of mind uploading is to provide a permanent backup to our '' mind-file '' , to enable interstellar space travels , and a means for human culture to survive a global disaster by making a functional copy of a human society in a computing device . whole brain emulation is discussed by some futurists as a '' logical endpoint '' of the topical computational neuroscience and neuroinformatics fields , both about brain simulation for medical research purposes . it is discussed in artificial intelligence research publications as an approach to strong ai ( artificial general intelligence ) and to at least weak superintelligence . another approach is seed ai , which would n't be based on existing brains . computer-based intelligence such as an upload could think much faster than a biological human even if it were no more intelligent . a large-scale society of uploads might , according to futurists , give rise to a technological singularity , meaning a sudden time constant decrease in the exponential development of technology . mind uploading is a central conceptual feature of mind uploading in fiction .