wireless communication ( or just wireless , when the context allows ) is the electromagnetic telecommunication between two or more points that do not use an electrical conductor as a medium by which to perform the transfer . the most common wireless technologies use radio waves . with radio waves , intended distances can be short , such as a few meters for bluetooth or as far as millions of kilometers for nasa deep space network . it encompasses various types of fixed , mobile , and portable applications , including two-way radios , mobile phone , personal digital assistants ( pdas ) , and wireless networking . other examples of applications of radio wireless technology include gps units , garage door openers , wireless computer mouse , keyboards and headsets , headphones , radio receivers , satellite television , broadcast television and cordless telephones . somewhat less common methods of achieving wireless communications include the use of other electromagnetic wireless technologies , such as light , magnetic , or electric fields or the use of sound . the term wireless has been used twice in communications history , with slightly different meaning . it was initially used from about 1890 for the first radio transmitting and receiving technology , as in wireless telegraphy , until the new word radio replaced it around 1920 . radios in the uk that were not portable continued to be referred to as wireless sets into the 1960s . the term was revived in the 1980s and 1990s mainly to distinguish digital devices that communicate without wires , such as the examples listed in the previous paragraph , from those that require wires or cables . this became its primary usage in the 2000s , due to the advent of technologies such as mobile broadband , wi-fi and bluetooth . wireless operations permit services , such as mobile and interplanetary communications , that are impossible or impractical to implement with the use of wires . the term is commonly used in the telecommunications industry to refer to telecommunications systems ( e.g . radio transmitters and receivers , remote controls , etc . ) which use some form of energy ( e.g . radio waves , acoustic energy , ) to transfer information without the use of wires . information is transferred in this manner over both short and long distances .