hand , foot , and mouth disease ( hfmd ) is a common infection caused by a group of viruses . it typically begins with a fever and malaise . this is followed a day or two later by maculopapular rash that may blister , on the hands , feet and mouth and occasionally buttocks and groin . signs and symptoms normally appear 3–6 days after incubation period . the rash generally resolves on its own in about a week . fingernail and toenail loss may occur a few weeks later , but they will regrow with time . the viruses that cause hfmd are spread through close personal contact , through the air from coughing and the feces of an infected person . contaminated objects can also spread the disease . coxsackievirus a16 is the most common cause , and enterovirus 71 is the second-most common cause . other strains of coxsackievirus and enterovirus can also be responsible . some people may carry and pass on the virus despite having no symptoms of disease . other animals are not involved . diagnosis can often be made based on symptoms . occasionally , a throat or stool sample may be tested for the virus . handwashing may prevent spread , and those infected should not go to work , daycare or school . no antiviral drug or vaccine is available , but development efforts are underway . most cases require no specific treatment . simple pain medication such as ibuprofen or numbing mouth gel may be used . occasionally , intravenous fluids are given to children who are unable to drink enough . rarely , viral meningitis or encephalitis may complicate the disease . hfmd occurs in all areas of the world . it often occurs in small epidemic in nursery schools or kindergartens . large outbreaks have been occurring in asia since 1997 . it usually occurs during the spring , summer and fall months . typically it occurs in children less than five years old but can occasionally occur in adults . hfmd should not be confused with foot-and-mouth disease ( also known as hoof-and-mouth disease ) , which mostly affects livestock .