video nasty is a colloquial term in the united kingdom to refer to a number of films , typically low-budget horror and exploitation films , distributed on videotape that were criticised for their violent content by the press , social commentators and various religious organisations . the term was popularised by the mediawatch-uk ( nvala ) in the uk in the early 1980s . these video releases were not brought before the british board of film classification ( bbfc ) due to a loophole in film classification laws that allowed videos to bypass the review process . the resulting uncensored video releases led to public debate concerning the availability of these films to children due to the unregulated nature of the market . following a campaign led by mary whitehouse and the nvala , prosecutions were commenced against individuals engaged in trades exploiting allegedly obscene videos . to assist local authorities in identifying obscene films , the director of public prosecutions released a list of 72 films the office believed to violate the obscene publications act 1959 and another list of 82 titles which they felt may not achieve successful prosecutions but could nonetheless be forfeited under the lesser section 3 obscenity charge . this list included films in respect of which individuals had previously been acquitted of obscenity which had already obtained bbfc certification . the subsequent revisions to the list and confusion regarding what constituted obscene material led to parliament passing the video recordings act 1984 , which required certification of video releases by the bbfc . the implementation of the video recording act imposed a stricter code of censorship on videos than was required for cinema release . several major studio productions were banned on video , as they fell within the scope of legislation designed to control the distribution of video nasties . in recent years , the stricter requirements have been relaxed , as numerous films once considered video nasties have obtained certification uncut or with minimal edits . due to a legislative mistake discovered in august 2009 , the video recordings act 1984 was repealed and re-enacted without change by the video recordings act 2010 .