constantine was born at the psychiko palace in psychiko , a suburb of athens . he was the nephew of king george ii , and also the second child and only son of the king 's brother and heir presumptive , paul of greece . his mother was princess frederica of hanover . constantine 's older sister , queen sofía of spain , is the wife of the retired king juan carlos i of spain , while his younger sister , princess irene , has never been married . constantine was just one year old when fascist italy and nazi germany invaded greece , and he spent the next four years in exile in egypt and cape town , south africa , ( where his sister irene was born ) with his family . he returned to greece with his family in 1946 . king george died in 1947 , and constantine 's father became the new king , making constantine the crown prince . he was educated at a preparatory school and later a boarding school ( victoria college of alexandria , egypt , where his classmates included king hussein of jordan and actor omar sharif ) . a fellow student recalled him as '' a good chap , a young man with all the right instincts . he was at his best on the playing fields . '' constantine served in all three branches of the hellenic armed forces , attending the requisite military academies . he also attended the nato air force special weapons school in germany , as well as the university of athens , where he took courses in the school of law . he is an honorable member of the international soling association and honorable president of the international dragon association . constantine was an able sportsman . in 1960 , aged 20 , he won an olympic gold medal in sailing ( dragon class ) , which was the first greek gold medal in sailing since the stockholm 1912 summer olympics . he was also a strong swimmer and had a black belt in karate , with interests in squash , track events and riding . in 1963 constantine became a member of the international olympic committee ( ioc ) . he resigned in 1974 because he was no longer a greek resident , and was made an honorary ioc member .