east timor is a country in southeast asia and oceania known as democratic republic of timor-leste . the country comprises the eastern half of the island of timor and the nearby islands of atauro and jaco . the first inhabitants are thought to be descendant of australoid and melanesian peoples . the portuguese began to trade with timor by the early 16th century and colonised it throughout the mid-century . skirmishing with the dutch in the region eventually resulted in an 1859 treaty for which portugal ceded the western half of the island . imperial japan battle of timor during world war ii , but portugal resumed colonial authority after the surrender of japan . east timor declared itself independent from portugal on 28 november 1975 , but was indonesian invasion of east timor nine days later . the country was later incorporated as a province of indonesia . during the subsequent two-decade occupation , a campaign of pacification ensued . although indonesia did make substantial investment in infrastructures during its occupation in east timor , dissatisfaction remained widespread . between 1975 and 1999 , there were an estimated about 102,800 conflict-related deaths ( approximately 18,600 killings and 84,200 'excess ' deaths from hunger and illness ) , the majority of which occurred during the indonesian occupation . on 30 august 1999 , in a un-sponsored referendum , an overwhelming majority of east timorese voted for independence from indonesia . immediately following the referendum , pro-indonesia militia – organised and supported by the indonesian military – commenced a scorched earth campaign . the militias killed approximately 1,400 timorese and forcibly pushed 300,000 people into west timor as refugees . the majority of the country 's infrastructure was destroyed during this attack . on 20 september 1999 , the international force for east timor ( interfet ) was deployed to the country and brought the violence to an end . following a east timor ( transition ) , east timor was internationally recognised as an independent nation on 20 may 2002 . it is the 133rd richest country with a 20 % unemployment rate , and approximately half of the population is illiterate .