also in 2014 , baldwin was one of the inaugural honorees in the rainbow honor walk , a walk of fame in san francisco 's castro neighborhood celebrating lgbtq people who have '' made significant contributions in their fields . '' also in 2014 , the social justice hub at the new school ’ s newly opened university center was named the baldwin rivera boggs center after activists baldwin , sylvia rivera , and grace lee boggs . in 2016 , raoul peck released his documentary film i am not your negro . it is based on james baldwin 's unfinished manuscript , remember this house . it is a 93-minute journey into black history that connects the past of the civil rights movement to the present of black lives matter . it is a film that questions black representation in hollywood and beyond . in 2017 , scott timberg wrote an essay for the los angeles times ( '' 30 years after his death , james baldwin is having a new pop culture moment '' ) in which he noted existing cultural references to baldwin , 30 years after his death , and concluded : '' so baldwin is not just a writer for the ages , but a scribe whose work—as squarely as george orwell's—speaks directly to ours . '' in june 2019 baldwin 's residence on the upper west side was given landmark designation by new york city 's landmarks preservation commission . in june 2019 , baldwin was one of the inaugural fifty american '' pioneers , trailblazers , and heroes '' inducted on the national lgbtq wall of honor within the stonewall national monument ( snm ) in new york city ’ s stonewall inn . the snm is the first u.s . national monument dedicated to lgbtq rights and history , and the wall 's unveiling was timed to take place during the 50th anniversary of the stonewall riots . at the paris council of june 2019 , the city of paris voted unanimously by all political groups to name a place in the capital in the name of james baldwin . the project was confirmed on june 19 , 2019 and announced for the year 2020 . in 2021 , paris city hall announced that the writer would give his name to the very first media library in the 19th arrondissement , which is scheduled to open in 2023 .