in photography , dynamic range is measured in exposure value ( ev ) differences , known as stops . an increase of one ev , or one stop , represents a doubling of the amount of light . conversely , a decrease of one ev represents a halving of the amount of light . therefore , revealing detail in the darkest of shadows requires high exposures , while preserving detail in very bright situations requires very low exposures . most cameras can not provide this range of exposure values within a single exposure , due to their low dynamic range . high-dynamic-range photographs are generally achieved by capturing multiple standard-exposure images , often using exposure bracketing , and then later merging them into a single hdr image , usually within a photo manipulation program . any camera that allows manual exposure control can make images for hdr work , although one equipped with autobracketing is far better suited . images from film cameras are less suitable as they often must first be digitized , so that they can later be processed using software hdr methods . in most imaging devices , the degree of exposure to light applied to the active element ( be it film or ccd ) can be altered in one of two ways : by either increasing/decreasing the size of the aperture or by increasing/decreasing the time of each exposure . exposure variation in an hdr set is only done by altering the exposure time and not the aperture size ; this is because altering the aperture size also affects the depth of field and so the resultant multiple images would be quite different , preventing their final combination into a single hdr image . an important limitation for hdr photography is that any movement between successive images will impede or prevent success in combining them afterward . also , as one must create several images ( often three or five and sometimes more ) to obtain the desired luminance range , such a full set of images takes extra time . hdr photographers have developed calculation methods and techniques to partially overcome these problems , but the use of a sturdy tripod is , at least , advised . some cameras have an autobracketing ( aeb ) feature with a far greater dynamic range than others , from 0.6 at the low end to 18 & nbsp ; ev in top professional cameras , as the popularity of this imaging method grows , several camera manufacturers are now offering built-in hdr features . for example , the pentax k-7 dslr has an hdr mode that captures an hdr image and outputs ( only ) a tone mapped jpeg file . the canon powershot g12 , canon powershot s95 , and canon powershot s100 offer similar features in a smaller format . nikon 's approach is called 'active d-lighting ' which applies exposure compensation and tone mapping to the image as it comes from the sensor , with the emphasis being on creating a realistic effect . some smartphones provide hdr modes , and most mobile platforms have apps that provide hdr picture taking . android examples : camera characteristics such as gamma curves , sensor resolution , noise , photometric calibration and color calibration affect resulting high-dynamic-range images . color film negatives and slides consist of multiple film layers that respond to light differently . original film ( especially negatives versus transparencies or slides ) feature a very high dynamic range ( in the order of 8 for negatives and 4 to 4.5 for slides ) .