the thracians ; thrāikes ; were an indo-european people who inhabited large parts of eastern and southeast europe in ancient history . . '' the thracians were an indo-european people who occupied the area between northern greece , southern russia , and north-western turkey . they shared the same language and culture . there may have been as many as a million thracians , diveded among up to 40 tribes . '' . '' one of the best documented indo-european civilizations that inhabited bulgaria is the thracians . '' thracians resided mainly in the balkans , but were also located in asia minor and other locations in eastern europe . the exact origin of thracians is unknown , but it is believed that proto-thracians descended from a mixture of indo-europeans and neolithic europe during the second millennium bc . the proto-thracian culture developed into the dacian and thracian culture . thracian culture was described as tribe by the ancient greece and romans . they remained largely disunited with the first permanent state being the odrysian kingdom in the fifth century bc . they faced subjugation by the achaemenid empire around the same time . thracians experienced a short period of peace after the persians were defeated by the greeks in the persian wars . the odrysian kingdom lost independence to macedonia in the late 4th century bc , and never regained total independence following alexander the great 's death . the thracians faced conquest by the romans in the mid second century bc under whom they faced internal strife . they composed major parts of rebellions against the romans along with the macedonians until the third macedonian war . thracians were integrated into roman society and later converted to christianity . the last reported use of a thracian language was by monks in the sixth century ad . thracians were described as '' warlike '' and '' barbarians '' by the greeks and romans and were favored as mercenaries . ancient descriptions of a vicious people are disputed and archaeology has been used since the mid-twentieth century in southern bulgaria to identify more about them . thracians spoke the extinct thracian language and shared a common culture . they followed a polytheism with the exception of the monotheism dacians who worshipped zalmoxis . the study of the thracians is known as thracology .