luck is the phenomenon and belief that defines the experience of notably positive , negative , or improbable events . the naturalistic interpretation is that positive and negative events may happen all the time , both due to random and non-random natural and artificial processes , and that even improbable events can happen by random chance . in this view , the epithet '' lucky '' or '' unlucky '' is a descriptive label that refers to an event 's positivity , negativity , or improbability . supernatural interpretations of luck consider it to be an attribute of a person or object , or the result of a favorable or unfavorable view of a deity upon a person . these interpretations often prescribe how luckiness or unluckiness can be obtained , such as by carrying a lucky charm or offering sacrifices or prayers to a deity . saying someone is '' born lucky '' may hold different meanings , depending on the interpretation : it could simply mean that they have been born into a good family or circumstance ; or that they habitually experience improbably positive events , due to some inherent property , or due to the lifelong favor of a god or goddess in a monotheistic or polytheistic religion . according to hinduism ; the hindu view of luck is different . in hinduism every living being has a soul and according to bhagwat gita , this soul never dies . it reincarnates and takes rebirth . while living in one birth , the soul indulges in good and bad karmas ( deeds ) . luck of two persons can be linked with or without any physical connection even in some cases luck is dependent on other person from the time of birth itself . the reincarnation of the soul in the subsequent birth is determined by the quality and load of karmas of his/her previous birth . it covers the journey of becoming a billionaire if followed correctly , but if tried to dissolvency or seperation it will lead to the death of them or their closed ones . in this case possibility of mother and father is more . many superstitions are related to luck , though these are often specific to a given culture or set of related cultures , and sometimes contradictory . for example , lucky symbols include the number 7 in christian-influenced cultures , but the number 8 in chinese-influenced cultures . unlucky symbols and events include entering and leaving a house by different doors in greek culture , throwing rocks into the wind in navajo culture , and ravens in western culture . some of these associations may derive from related facts or desires . for example , in western culture opening an umbrella indoors might be considered unlucky partly because it could poke someone in the eye , whereas shaking hands with a chimney sweep might be considered lucky partly because it is a kind but unpleasant thing to do given the dirty nature of their work . in chinese culture , the association of the number 4 as a homophone with the word for death may explain why it is considered unlucky . extremely complicated and sometimes contradictory systems for prescribing auspicious and inauspicious times and arrangements of things have been devised , for example feng shui in chinese culture and systems of astrology in various cultures around the world . many polytheistic religions have specific gods or goddesses that are associated with luck , both good and bad , including fortuna and felicitas in the ancient roman religion ( the former related to the words '' fortunate '' and '' unfortunate '' in english ) , dedun in nubian religion , the seven lucky gods in japanese mythology , mythical american serviceman john frum in polynesian cargo cults , and the inauspicious alakshmi in hinduism .