in economics , the fiscal multiplier ( not to be confused with the money multiplier ) is the ratio of change in national income arising from a change in government spending . more generally , the exogenous spending multiplier is the ratio of change in national income arising from any autonomous change in spending ( including private investment spending , consumer spending , government spending , or spending by foreigners on the country 's exports ) . when this multiplier exceeds one , the enhanced effect on national income may be called the multiplier effect . the mechanism that can give rise to a multiplier effect is that an initial incremental amount of spending can lead to increased income and hence increased consumption spending , increasing income further and hence further increasing consumption , etc . , resulting in an overall increase in national income greater than the initial incremental amount of spending . in other words , an initial change in aggregate demand may cause a change in aggregate output ( and hence the aggregate income that it generates ) that is a multiple of the initial change . the existence of a multiplier effect was initially proposed by keynes student richard kahn in 1930 and published in 1931 . some other schools of economic thought reject or downplay the importance of multiplier effects , particularly in terms of the long run . the multiplier effect has been used as an argument for the efficacy of government spending or taxation relief to stimulate aggregate demand . in certain cases multiplier values less than one have been empirically measured ( an example is sports stadiums ) , suggesting that certain types of government spending crowd out fixed investment or consumer spending that would have otherwise taken place . this crowding out can occur because the initial increase in spending may cause an increase in interest rates or in the price level . in 2009 , the economist magazine noted '' economists are in fact deeply divided about how well , or indeed whether , such stimulus works '' , partly because of a lack of empirical data from non-military based stimulus . new evidence came from the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , whose benefits were projected based on fiscal multipliers and which was in fact followed—from 2010 to 2012—by a slowing of job loss and job growth in the private sector .