phineas taylor barnum ; july 5 , 1810 – april 7 , 1891 ) was an american showman , politician , and businessman , remembered for promoting celebrated hoaxes and for founding the barnum & bailey circus ( 1871–2017 ) . north american theatre online : phineas t . barnum he was also an author , publisher , and philanthropist , though he said of himself : '' i am a showman by profession & nbsp ; . and all the gilding shall make nothing else of me '' . according to his critics , his personal aim was '' to put money in his own coffers . '' he is widely credited with coining the adage '' there 's a sucker born every minute '' , shapiro , fred r . the yale book of quotations . new haven : yale up , 2006 . p . 44 although no proof can be found of him saying this . barnum became a small business owner in his early twenties and founded a weekly newspaper before moving to new york city in 1834 . he embarked on an entertainment career , first with a variety troupe called '' barnum 's grand scientific and musical theater '' , and soon after by purchasing barnum 's american museum which he renamed after himself . he used the museum as a platform to promote hoaxes and human curiosities such as the fiji mermaid and general tom thumb . in 1850 , he promoted the american tour of swedish opera singer jenny lind , paying her an unprecedented 1,000 a night for 150 nights . he suffered economic reversals in the 1850s due to bad investments , as well as years of litigation and public humiliation , but he used a lecture tour as a temperance speaker to emerge from debt . his museum added america 's first aquarium and expanded the wax-figure department . barnum served four terms in the connecticut legislature in 1865 as a republican for fairfield , connecticut . he spoke before the legislature concerning the ratification of the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution which abolished slavery and involuntary servitude : '' a human soul , 'that god has created and christ died for , ' is not to be trifled with . it may tenant the body of a chinaman , a turk , an arab , or a hottentot—it is still an immortal spirit '' . he was elected in 1875 as mayor of bridgeport , connecticut where he worked to improve the water supply , bring gas lighting to streets , and enforce liquor and prostitution laws . he was also instrumental in starting bridgeport hospital in 1878 and was its first president . nevertheless , the circus business , begun when he was 49 years old , was the source of much of his enduring fame . he established '' p . t . barnum 's grand traveling museum , menagerie , caravan & hippodrome '' in 1870 , a traveling circus , menagerie , and museum of '' freaks '' which adopted many names over the years . barnum was married to charity hallett from 1829 until her death in 1873 , and they had four children . in 1874 , a few months after his wife 's death , he married nancy fish , his friend 's daughter who was 40 years his junior . they were married until 1891 when barnum died of blood loss in the midst of a fight . he was buried in mountain grove cemetery , bridgeport , which he designed himself .