arguing in favour of independence , president mangope claimed that the move would enable its population to negotiate with south africa from a stronger position : '' we would rather face the difficulties of administering a fragmented territory , the wrath of the outside world , and accusations of ill-informed people . it 's the price we are prepared to pay for being masters of our own destiny . '' united nations secretary-general kurt waldheim stated that he '' strongly deplored '' the establishment of '' another so-called independent tribal homeland in pursuance of the discredited policies of apartheid '' , and in resolution a/res/32/105n , passed on 14 december 1977 , the united nations general assembly linked bophuthatswana 's '' so-called 'independence to south africa 's '' stubborn pursuit '' of its policies , and called upon all governments to '' deny any form of recognition to the so-called 'independent ' bantustans '' . during a parliamentary debate in the uk on 6 december 1977 , foreign secretary david owen replied in the negative when asked '' whether her majesty 's government intend to recognise passport issued by the authorities of & nbsp ; . bophuthatswana for the purpose of admitting visitors to the united kingdom '' . while the majority of news reports echoed these official declarations , there were others which opined that western critics should '' suspend judgment for a time '' , kilpatrick , james . '' give new nations a chance '' . prescott courier , 5 january 1978 and despite its generally critical stance on south africa 's policies , time magazine wrote that bophuthatswana had '' considerable economic potential '' with an expected 30 million a year coming from mining revenues . despite its official isolation , however , the government in mmabatho managed to set up a trade mission in tel aviv , israel , peters , joel . israel and africa . the british academic press . london:1992 . p161 and conducted some business with neighbouring botswana in an effort to sway attitudes ; furthermore , botswana agreed on '' informal arrangements '' short of official recognition in order to facilitate cross-border travel . bophuthatswana maintained an unofficial embassy in israel during the 1980s , located next to the british embassy in tel aviv . the israeli foreign ministry objected to the embassy 's presence , as israel did not recognize bophuthatswana as a country . the bantustan 's president , lucas mangope , was nevertheless able to meet with prominent figures such as moshe dayan during visits to israel . the unspoken alliance : israel 's secret relationship with apartheid south africa , sasha polakow-suransky , pantheon books , new york , 2010 , page 157 . in the 1982 elections , the democratic party won all 72 elected seats . it also won a large majority in the 1987 elections .