a brigade is a major tactical military unit that is typically composed of three to six battalions plus supporting elements . it is roughly equivalent to an enlarged or reinforced regiment . two or more brigades may constitute a division . brigades formed into divisions are usually infantry or armored ( sometimes referred to as combined arms brigades ) . in addition to combat units , they may include combat support units or sub-units , such as artillery and engineers , and logistic units . historically , such brigades have sometimes been called brigade-groups . on operations , a brigade may comprise both organic elements and attached elements , including some temporarily attached for a specific task . brigades may also be specialized and comprise battalions of a single branch , for example cavalry , mechanized , armored , artillery , air defence , aviation , engineers , signals or logistic . some brigades are classified as independent or separate and operate independently from the traditional division structure . the typical nato standard brigade consists of approximately 3,200 to 5,500 troops . however , in switzerland and austria , the numbers could go as high as 11,000 troops . the soviet union , its forerunners and successors , mostly use '' regiment '' instead of brigade , and this was common in much of europe until after world war ii . a brigade 's commander is commonly a major general , brigadier general , brigadier or colonel . in some armies , the commander is rated as a general officer . the brigade commander has a self-contained headquarters and staff . the principal staff officer , usually a lieutenant colonel or colonel , may be designated chief of staff . until the late 20th century british and similar armies called the position 'brigade-major ’ and most british brigades have a major as the chief of staff . some brigades may also have a deputy commander . the headquarters has a nucleus of staff officers and support ( clerks , assistants and drivers ) that can vary in size depending on the type of brigade . on operations , additional specialist elements may be attached . the headquarters will usually have its own communications unit . in some gendarmerie forces , brigades are the basic-level organizational unit .