a grammar school is one of several different types of school in the history of education in the united kingdom and other english-speaking countries , originally a school teaching latin , but more recently an academically oriented secondary school , differentiated in recent years from less academic secondary modern schools . the main difference is that a grammar school may select pupils based on academic achievement whereas a secondary modern may not . the original purpose of medieval grammar schools was the teaching of latin . over time the curriculum was broadened , first to include ancient greek , and later english and other european languages , natural sciences , mathematics , history , geography , and other subjects . in the late victorian era grammar schools were reorganised to provide secondary education throughout england and wales ; scotland had developed a different system . grammar schools of these types were also established in british territories overseas , where they have evolved in different ways . grammar schools became the selective tier of the tripartite system of state-funded secondary education operating in england and wales from the mid-1940s to the late 1960s and continuing in northern ireland . with the move to non-selective comprehensive schools in the 1960s and 1970s , some grammar schools became fully independent schools and charged fees , while most others were abolished or became comprehensive ( or sometimes merged with a secondary modern to form a new comprehensive school ) . in both cases , many of these schools kept '' grammar school '' in their names . more recently , a number of state grammar schools still retaining their selective intake gained academy status , meaning that they are independent of the local education authority . some parts of england retain forms of the tripartite system , and a few grammar schools survive in otherwise comprehensive areas . some of the remaining grammar schools can trace their histories to before the 16th century .