baked beans is a dish traditionally containing white beans which are parboiled and then baked at a low temperature for a lengthy period of time in some sort of sauce . this is the usual preparation of the dish in the united states when not using canned beans . in the united kingdom the dish is sometimes baked , but usually stewed in a sauce . canned baked beans are not baked , but are cooked through a steam process . baked beans has its origins in native american cuisine , and the dish is made from beans indigenous to the americas . the dish was adopted and adapted by english colonists in new england in the 17th century and , through cookbooks published in the 19th century , the dish spread to other regions of the united states and into canada . today in the new england region of the united states a variety of indigenous legumes are still used when preparing this dish in restaurants or in the home , such as jacob 's cattle , soldier beans , yellow-eyed beans , and navy beans ( also known as native beans ) . originally baked beans were sweetened with maple syrup by native americans , a tradition some recipes still follow , but some english colonists modified the sweetening agent to brown sugar beginning in the 17th century . in the 18th century the convention of using american-made molasses as a sweetening agent became increasingly popular in order to avoid british taxes on sugar . american boston baked beans use a sauce prepared with molasses and salt pork , the popularity of which has led to the city 's being nicknamed '' beantown '' . today baked beans are commonly served throughout the united states alongside barbecue food of various kinds and at picnics . beans in a brown sugar , sugar , or corn syrup sauce ( sometimes with and sometimes without a tomato base ) are widely available throughout the united states . bush brothers and company currently sells the most baked beans in the united states . after the revolutionary war , the fourth of july was celebrated with picnics , fireworks , dances and dinners . the foods served varied , changing with the customs of each region , but baked beans was one of the common dishes served for the celebrations in the northern united states . canned baked beans are used as a convenience food , and most commercially canned baked beans are made from navy beans , also known as navy beans ( a variety of phaseolus vulgaris ) in a sauce . they may be eaten hot or cold , straight from the can , as they are already fully cooked . mass production of canned baked beans began in the united states in 1895 by the h . j . heinz company . in the early 20th century , canned baked beans became popular internationally , particularly in the united kingdom where the greatest amount of canned baked beans is currently consumed as part of a standard english full breakfast .