nine cities submitting bids to host the 2012 summer olympics and 2012 summer paralympics were recognised by the international olympic committee ( ioc ) . the committee shortlisted five of them—london , madrid , moscow , new york city , and paris—from which london eventually prevailed ; thus becoming the first city to host the olympic games for a third time . the bidding process for the 2012 olympics was considered one of the most hotly contested in the history of the ioc . paris was seen by some as the front-runner for much of the campaign , but skillful lobbying by london 's supporters and an inspirational final presentation by sebastian coe led to the success of its bid . after a technical evaluation of the nine original bids , the top five were shortlisted on 18 may 2004 , becoming official candidates . the remaining applicant cities—havana , istanbul , leipzig and rio de janeiro—were eliminated . four of the five candidate cities were prominent national capitals , which lent an increased competitive interest to the final bidding phase . paris and madrid earned the top scores during the application phase , but in early 2005 , a more thorough evaluation of the candidates put paris and london in a close race that became tighter as the final vote approached . on 6 july 2005 , in a four-round exhaustive ballot of the ioc ( gathered at the 117th ioc session in singapore ) , moscow , new york city and madrid were eliminated in the first three rounds . london won the final round by a margin of four votes over paris and secured the right to host the 2012 olympics . in the month after the election , members of the paris 2012 delegation argued that the london delegation had violated ioc rules . the key points in the accusations were london 2012 's abortive athlete incentive initiative and lobbying by then-british prime minister tony blair . a public statement by ioc president jacques rogge dismissed these accusations , stating that the competition had been fair . another controversy occurred during the bidding process when an undercover investigation by british television series panorama revealed a corruption scandal associated with ioc member ivan slavkov and olympic agents , who offered to deliver votes from ioc members to any 2012 olympic bid in return for financial favours . still recovering from the effects of the salt lake city scandal , the ioc reacted swiftly and punitively toward the rule-breaking individuals .