the surface was initially reported to be a clay-like '' material which might have a thin crust followed by a region of relative uniform consistency . '' one esa scientist compared the texture and colour of titan 's surface to a crème brûlée ( that is , a hard surface covering a sticky mud like subsurface ) . subsequent analysis of the data suggests that surface consistency readings were likely caused by huygens pushing a large pebble into the ground as it landed , and that the surface is better described as a '' sand '' made of ice grains titan probe 's pebble 'bash-down ' , bbc news , april 10 , 2005 . or snow that has been frozen on top . the images taken after the probe 's landing show a flat plain covered in pebbles . the pebbles , which may be made of hydrocarbon-coated water ice , are somewhat rounded , which may indicate the action of fluids on them . new images from the huygens probe : shorelines and channels , but an apparently dry surface , emily lakdawalla , january 15 , 2005 , verified march 28 , 2005 the rocks appear to be rounded , size-selected and size-layered as though located in the bed of a stream within a dark lakebed , which consists of finer-grained material . no pebbles larger than across were spotted , while rocks smaller than are rare on the huygens landing site . this implies large pebbles can not be transported to the lakebed , while small rocks are quickly removed from the surface . the temperature at the landing site was and pressure of , implying a methane abundance of 5 ± 1 % and methane relative humidity of 50 % near the surface . therefore , ground fogs caused by methane in the neighborhood of the landing site are unlikely . thermometers indicated that heat left huygens so quickly that the ground must have been damp , and one image shows light reflected by a dewdrop as it falls across the camera 's field of view . on titan , the feeble sunlight allows only about one centimeter of evaporation per year ( versus one metre of water on earth ) , but the atmosphere can hold the equivalent of about of liquid before rain forms vs . only a few centimeters on earth . so titan 's weather is expected to feature torrential downpours causing flash floods , interspersed by decades or centuries of drought . huygens found the brightness of the surface of titan ( at time of landing ) to be about one thousand times dimmer than full solar illumination on earth ( or 500 times brighter than illumination by full moonlight ) —that is , the illumination level experienced about ten minutes after sunset on earth , approximately late civil twilight . the color of the sky and the scene on titan is mainly orange due to the much greater attenuation of blue light by titan 's haze relative to red light . the sun ( which was comparatively high in the sky when huygens landed ) would be visible as a small , bright spot , one tenth the size of the solar disk seen from earth , and comparable in size and brightness to a car headlight seen from about . it casts sharp shadows , but of low contrast as 90 % of the illumination comes from the sky .