this is a list of military installations owned or used by the united states armed forces currently located in the united states and around the world . this list details only current or recently closed facilities ; some defunct facilities are found at : category : closed military installations of the united states . an '' installation '' is defined as '' a military base , camp , post , station , yard , center , homeport facility for any ship , or other activity under the jurisdiction of the department of defense , including leased space , that is controlled by , or primarily supports dod 's activities . an installation may consist of one or more sites '' ( geographically-separated real estate parcels ) . the united states operates a global network of military installations and is by far the largest operator of military bases abroad with locations in dozens of nations on every continent , with 38 '' named bases '' what are here termed '' named bases '' are the bases listed in section x : '' personnel data from dmdc '' , i.e . excluding that table 's rows labelled '' other '' , in the 2015 dod base structure report . having active-duty , national guard , reserve , or civilian personnel as of september 30 , 2014 . its largest , in terms of personnel , is ramstein ab , in germany , with almost 9,200 personnel . the 2015 u.s . base structure report gives 587 overseas sites , but sites are merely real property at a distinct geographical location , and multiple sites may belong to one installation ( page dod-3 ) . for example , the garmisch , germany '' named base '' with its 72 personnel has eight distinct sites large enough to be listed in the army 's individual service inventory list : artillery kaserne , breitenau skeet range , garmisch family housing , garmish golf course , general abrams hotel and disp , hausberg ski area , oberammergau nato school , and sheridan barracks ( listed in army-15 to army-17 ) . these range in size from ramstein ab with 9,188 active , guard/reserve , and civilian personnel down to worms , which has just one civilian . the pentagon stated in 2013 that there are '' around '' 5,000 bases total , with '' around '' 600 of them overseas . due to the sensitive nature of the subject there is no comprehensive list of detailed information on the exact number or location of all bases , stations and installations as it involves highly classified information . the total number of foreign sites for installations and facilities that are either in active use and service or may be activated and operated and by american military personnel and allies is at just over 1000 .