the subprime mortgage industry collapsed in march 2007 , with many of the largest lenders filing for bankruptcy protection in the face of spiraling foreclosure rates . for these reasons , greenspan has been criticized for his role in the rise of the housing bubble and the subsequent problems in the mortgage industry , as well as '' engineering '' the housing bubble itself . in 2004 businessweek magazine analysts argued : '' it was the federal reserve-engineered decline in rates that inflated the housing bubble.the most troublesome aspect of the price runup is that many recent buyers are squeezing into houses that they can barely afford by taking advantage of the lower rates available from adjustable-rate mortgages . that leaves them fully exposed to rising rates . in september 2008 joseph stiglitz stated that greenspan '' did n't really believe in regulation ; when the excesses of the financial system were noted , ( he and others ) called for self-regulation—an oxymoron '' . greenspan , according to the new york times , says he himself is blameless . on april 6 , 2005 , greenspan called for a substantial increase in the regulation of fannie mae and freddie mac : '' appearing before the senate banking committee , the fed chairman , alan greenspan , said the enormous portfolios of the companies—nearly a quarter of the home-mortgage market—posed significant risks to the nation 's financial system should either company face significant problems . '' despite this , greenspan still claims to be a firm believer in free markets , although in his 2007 biography he wrote , '' history has not dealt kindly with the aftermath of protracted periods of low risk premiums '' as seen before the credit crisis of 2008 . in 2009 robert reich wrote that '' greenspan 's worst move was to contribute to the giant housing bubble and the worst worldwide crash since the great depression . in 2004 he lowered interest rates to 1 % , enabling banks to borrow money for free , adjusted for inflation . naturally , the banks wanted to borrow as much as they possibly could , then lend it out , earning nice profits . the situation screamed for government oversight of lending institutions , lest the banks lend to unfit borrowers . he refused , trusting the market to weed out bad credit risks . it did not . '' in congressional testimony on october 23 , 2008 , greenspan finally conceded error on regulation . the new york times wrote , '' a humbled mr . greenspan admitted that he had put too much faith in the self-correcting power of free markets and had failed to anticipate the self-destructive power of wanton mortgage lending.mr . greenspan refused to accept blame for the crisis but acknowledged that his belief in deregulation had been shaken '' . although many republican lawmakers tried to blame the housing bubble on fannie mae and freddie mac , greenspan placed far more blame on wall street for bundling subprime mortgages into securities .