or hancha mccune–reischauer romanization . mainly used in north korea . ) is the korean name for a traditional writing system consisting mainly of traditional chinese characters that was incorporated and used since the gojoseon period ( 400 bce ) . more specifically , it refers to the traditional chinese characters incorporated into the korean language with korean pronunciation . hanja-eo refers to words that can be written with hanja , and hanmun , refers to classical chinese writing , although '' hanja '' is sometimes also used loosely to encompass these concepts . because hanja never underwent major reform , they are almost entirely identical to traditional chinese and kyūjitai characters , though the stroke orders for some characters are slightly different . for example , the characters and are written as and . only a small number of hanja characters are modified or unique to korean . by contrast , many of the chinese characters currently in use in japan and mainland china have been simplified , and contain fewer strokes than the corresponding hanja characters . according to the standard korean language dictionary ( 표준국어대사전/標準國語大辭典 ) , published by the national institute of korean language ( 국립국어원/國立國語院 , nikl ) , out of the approximately 510,000 words in the korean language , 290,000 words ( 57 % ) were hanja-eo . although a phonetic hangul , now known as chosŏn'gŭl or hangul , had been created by sejong the great , it did not come into widespread official use until the late 19th and early 20th century . thus , until that time it was necessary to be fluent in reading and writing hanja to be literate in korean , as the vast majority of korean literature and most documents were written in literary chinese using hanja as its primary script . a good working knowledge of chinese characters is still important for anyone who wishes to study older texts ( up to about the 1890s ) , or anyone who wishes to read scholarly texts in the humanities . learning a certain number of hanja is very helpful for understanding the etymology of sino-korean words and for enlarging one 's korean vocabulary . today , hanja is not used to write native korean words , which are always rendered in hangul and even words of chinese origin—hanja-eo —are written with the hangul alphabet most of the time , with the corresponding chinese character often written next to it to prevent confusion with other characters or words with the same phonetics .