sacks began medical school at oxford university in 1956 and for the next two and a half years took courses in medicine , surgery , orthopaedics , paediatrics , neurology , psychiatry , dermatology , infectious diseases , obstetrics , and various other disciplines . during his years as a student , he helped home-deliver a number of babies . he received an ma degree and bm bch degree in 1958 . he qualified for his internship that december , which would begin at middlesex hospital the following month . '' my eldest brother , marcus , had trained at the middlesex , '' he said , '' and now i was following his footsteps . '' before beginning his internship he said he first wanted some actual hospital experience to gain more confidence and took a job at a hospital in st albans , where his mother had worked as an emergency surgeon during the war . he then did his six-month internship at middlesex hospital 's medical unit , followed by another six months in its neurological unit . he completed his internship in june 1960 but was uncertain about his future . sacks left britain and flew to montreal , canada on 9 july 1960 , his 27th birthday . he visited the montreal neurological institute and the royal canadian air force ( rcaf ) , telling them that he wanted to be a pilot . after some interviews and checking his background , they told him he would be best in medical research . but as he kept making mistakes , like losing data of several months of research , destroying irreplaceable slides and losing biological samples , his supervisors had second thoughts about him . oliver sacks chronicles the hilarious errors of his professional life and the fumbles in his private life dr . taylor , the head medical officer , told him , '' you are clearly talented and we would love to have you , but i am not sure about your motives for joining . '' he was told to travel for a few months and reconsider . he used the next three months to travel across canada and deep into the canadian rockies , which he described in his personal journal , later published as canada : pause , 1960 . he then made his way to the united states , completing a residency in neurology at mt . zion hospital in san francisco , and fellowships in neurology and psychiatry at ucla . while there , sacks became a lifelong close friend of poet thom gunn , saying he loved his wild imagination , his strict control , and perfect poetic form . during much of his time at ucla , he lived in a rented house in topanga canyon and experimented with various recreational drugs . he described some of his experiences in a 2012 new yorker article , and in his book hallucinations . sacks , o . hallucinations . knopf ( 2012 ) . during his early career in california and new york city he indulged in : staggering bouts of pharmacological experimentation , underwent a fierce regimen of bodybuilding at muscle beach ( for a time he held a california record , after he performed a full squat with 600 pounds across his shoulders ) , and racked up more than 100,000 leather-clad miles on his motorcycle . and then one day he gave it all up—the drugs , the sex , the motorcycles , the bodybuilding . he wrote that after moving to new york city , an amphetamine-facilitated epiphany that came as he read a book by the 19th century migraine doctor edward liveing inspired him to chronicle his observations on neurological diseases and oddities ; to become the '' liveing of our time '' .