he worked briefly as a private secretary , school teacher and film critic for the evening standard , where he also wrote for their high-society gossip column , the londoner 's diary . he was employed by the architectural review between 1930 and 1935 , as a full-time assistant editor , following their publishing of some of his freelance work . timothy mowl ( 2000 ) says , '' his years at the architectural review were to be his true university '' . at this time , while his prose style matured , he joined the mars group , an organisation of young modernist architects and architectural critics in britain . betjeman 's sexuality can best be described as bisexual , and his longest and best documented relationships were with women , and a fairer analysis of his sexuality may be that he was '' the hatcher of a lifetime of schoolboy crushes – both gay and straight '' , most of which progressed no further . nevertheless , he has been considered '' temperamentally gay '' , and even became a penpal of lord alfred douglas of oscar wilde fame . on 29 july 1933 betjeman married the hon . penelope chetwode , the daughter of field marshal lord chetwode . the couple lived in berkshire and had a son , paul , in 1937 , and a daughter , candida , in 1942 . in 1937 , betjeman was a churchwarden at uffington , the berkshire village ( in oxfordshire since boundary changes of 1974 ) where he lived . that year , he paid for the cleaning of the church 's royal arms and later presided over the conversion of the church 's oil lamps to electricity . the shell guides were developed by betjeman and jack beddington , a friend who was publicity manager with shell-mex ltd , to guide britain 's growing number of motorists around the counties of britain and their historical sites . they were published by the architectural press and financed by shell . by the start of world war ii 13 had been published , of which cornwall ( 1934 ) and devon ( 1936 ) were written by betjeman . a third , shropshire , was written with and designed by his good friend john piper in 1951 . in 1939 , betjeman was rejected for military service in world war ii but found war work with the films division of the ministry of information . in 1941 he became british press attaché in neutral dublin , ireland , working with sir john maffey . his secretary in dublin was the journalist and writer shevawn lynam , the author of the novel the spirit and the clay , about the resistance to francoism in the basque country . betjeman may have been involved with the gathering of intelligence . he is reported to have been selected for murder by the ira . the order was rescinded after a meeting with an unnamed old ira man who was impressed by his works . betjeman wrote a number of poems based on his experiences in ireland during the '' emergency '' ( the war ) including '' the irish unionist 's farewell to greta hellstrom in 1922 '' ( written during the war ) which contained the refrain '' dungarvan in the rain '' . the object of his affections , '' greta '' , has remained a mystery until recently revealed to have been a member of a well-known anglo-irish family of western county waterford . his official brief included establishing friendly contacts with leading figures in the dublin literary scene : he befriended patrick kavanagh , then at the very start of his career . kavanagh celebrated the birth of betjeman 's daughter with a poem '' candida '' ; another well-known poem contains the line let john betjeman call for me in a car . from march to november 1944 betjeman was assigned to another wartime job , working on publicity for the admiralty in bath .