tiziano vecelli or vecellio ; see below ; is generally accepted despite claims in his lifetime that he was older , getty union artist name list and metropolitan museum of art timeline , retrieved 11 february 2009 both use c . 1488 . see discussion of the issue below and at when was titian born ? , which sets out the evidence , and supports 1477—an unusual view today . gould ( pp . 264–66 ) also sets out much of the evidence without coming to a conclusion . charles hope in jaffé ( p . 11 ) also discusses the issue , favoring a date '' in or just before 1490 '' as opposed to the much earlier dates , as does penny ( p . 201 ) '' probably in 1490 or a little earlier '' . the question has become caught up in the still controversial division of works between giorgione and the young titian . – 27 august 1576 ) , known in english as titian , was a venetian painter during the renaissance , considered the most important member of the 16th-century venetian school . he was born in pieve di cadore , near belluno . during his lifetime he was often called da cadore , 'from cadore ' , taken from his native region . recognized by his contemporaries as '' the sun amidst small stars '' ( recalling the final line of dante 's paradiso ) , titian was one of the most versatile of italian painters , equally adept with portraits , landscape backgrounds , and mythological and religious subjects . his painting methods , particularly in the application and use of colour , exercised a profound influence not only on painters of the late italian renaissance , but on future generations of western art . fossi , gloria , italian art : painting , sculpture , architecture from the origins to the present day , p . 194 . giunti , 2000 . his career was successful from the start , and he became sought after by patrons , initially from venice and its possessions , then joined by the north italian princes , and finally the habsburgs and papacy . along with giorgione , he is considered a founder of the venetian school of italian renaissance painting . during the course of his long life , titian 's artistic manner changed drastically , the contours in early works may be described as '' crisp and clear '' , while of his late methods it was said that '' he painted more with his fingers than his brushes . '' dunkerton , jill , et al . , dürer to veronese : sixteenth-century painting in the national gallery , pp . 281–286 . yale university , national gallery publications , 1999 . but he retained a lifelong interest in colour . although his mature works may not contain the vivid , luminous tints of his early pieces , their loose brushwork and subtlety of tone were without precedent in the history of western painting .