salvatore '' sammy the bull '' gravano ( born march 12 , 1945 ) is an american gangster who became underboss of the gambino crime family . gravano played a major role in helping the prosecution sentence john gotti , the crime family 's boss , by agreeing to testify as a government witness against him and other mobsters in a deal in which he confessed to involvement in 19 murders . originally a mobster for the colombo crime family , and later for the brooklyn faction of the gambino family , gravano was part of the group that conspired to murder gambino boss paul castellano in 1985 . gravano played a key role in planning and executing castellano 's murder , along with gotti , angelo ruggiero , frank decicco , and joseph armone . soon after castellano 's murder , gotti elevated gravano to underboss , a position gravano held at the time he became a government witness . in 1991 , gravano agreed to turn state 's evidence and testify for the prosecution against gotti after hearing the boss making several disparaging remarks about gravano on a wiretap that implicated them both in several murders . at the time , gravano was the highest-ranking member of the five families to break his omertà and cooperate with the government . as a result of his testimonies , gotti and frank locascio were sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole , in 1992 . in 1994 , a federal judge sentenced gravano to five years in prison . however , since gravano had already served four years , the sentence amounted to less than one year . he was released early and entered the u.s . federal witness protection program in arizona , but left the program in 1995 . in 1997 , gravano was consulted several times for the biographical book about his life , underboss by author peter maas . in february 2000 , gravano and nearly 40 other ring members—including his ex-wife debra , daughter karen and son gerard—were arrested on federal and state drug charges . in 2002 , gravano was sentenced in new york to twenty years in prison . a month later , he was also sentenced in arizona to nineteen years in prison to run concurrently . he was initially scheduled to be released in march 2019 , however , was released early in september 2017 .