the mon or ; , ; , , are a southeast asian ethnic group who inhabit myanmar 's mon state , bago region , the irrawaddy delta , the southern myanmar border with thailand , and thailand 's thon buri district , pakret district , phra pradaeng district , bang pa-in district , ban pong district , photharam district , ban laem district , mueang lopburi district , thep sathit district , sangkhla buri district , song phi nong district , bang saphan district , tha sae district , pathio district , kathu district , phunphin district , mueang samut sakhon district , mueang samut songkhram district , mueang nakhon pathom district , bang len district , bang ban district , mueang pathum thani district , sam khok district , mueang chachoengsao district , si racha district , bo rai district , mueang trat district , si mahosot district , ban na district , mueang saraburi district , mueang sing buri district , nong chang district , mueang nakhon sawan district , mueang kamphaeng phet district , mueang tak district , mae sot district , mueang sukhothai district , mueang nan district , mueang phrae district , mueang lampang district , mueang lamphun district , pa sang district , san kamphaeng district , san pa tong district , pak thong chai district and lat krabang district . the mon were one of the earliest to reside in southeast asia , and were responsible for the spread of theravada buddhism in indochina . the civilisations founded by the mon were some of the earliest in thailand as well as myanmar . they speak the mon language , an austroasiatic language , and share a common origin with the nyah kur people of thailand ; they are from the mon mandala ( polity ) of dvaravati . a number of languages in mainland southeast asia are influenced by the mon language . the mon were a source of influence on the culture of myanmar and thailand . the mon are regarded as a large exporter of southeast asian culture . historically , many cities in both countries today , including yangon and bangkok were founded either by the mon people or mon rulers . nowadays , the mon are a major ethnic group in myanmar and a minor ethnic group in thailand . the mons from myanmar are called burmese mon or myanmar mon . the mons from thailand are referred as thai-raman or thai mon . the mon dialects of thailand and myanmar are mutually intelligible .