the fountainhead is a 1943 novel by russian-american author ayn rand , her first major literary success . the novel 's protagonist , howard roark , is an intransigent young architect , who battles against conventional standards and refuses to compromise with an architectural establishment unwilling to accept innovation . roark embodies what rand believed to be the ideal man , and his struggle reflects rand 's belief that individualism is superior to collectivism . roark is opposed by what he calls '' second-handers '' , who value conformity over independence and integrity . these include roark 's former classmate , peter keating , who succeeds by following popular styles but turns to roark for help with design problems . ellsworth toohey , a socialist architecture critic who uses his influence to promote his political and social agenda , tries to destroy roark 's career . tabloid newspaper publisher gail wynand seeks to shape popular opinion ; he befriends roark , then betrays him when public opinion turns in a direction he can not control . the novel 's most controversial character is roark 's lover , dominique francon . she believes that non-conformity has no chance of winning , so she alternates between helping roark and working to undermine him . twelve publishers rejected the manuscript before an editor at the bobbs-merrill company risked his job to get it published . contemporary reviewers ' opinions were polarized . some praised the novel as a powerful paean to individualism , while others thought it overlong and lacking sympathetic characters . initial sales were slow , but the book gained a following by word of mouth and became a bestseller . more than 6.5 & nbsp ; million copies of the fountainhead have been sold worldwide and it has been translated into more than 20 languages . the novel attracted a new following for rand and has enjoyed a lasting influence , especially among architects , entrepreneurs , american conservatives and right-libertarians . the novel has been adapted into other media several times . an illustrated version was syndicated in newspapers in 1945 . warner bros . produced a film version in 1949 ; rand wrote the screenplay , and gary cooper played roark . critics panned the film , which did not recoup its budget ; several directors and writers have considered developing a new film adaptation . in 2014 , belgian theater director ivo van hove created a stage adaptation , which has received mostly positive reviews .