christmas eve is the evening or entire day before christmas , the festival commemorating the birth of jesus . christmas day is observed around the world , and christmas eve is widely observed as a full or partial holiday in anticipation of christmas day . together , both days are considered one of the most culturally significant celebrations in christendom and western world . christmas celebrations in the denominations of western christianity have long begun on christmas eve , due in part to the christian liturgical day starting at sunset , a practice inherited from jewish tradition and based on the story of creation in the book of genesis : '' and there was evening , and there was morning – the first day . '' many churches still ring their church bells and hold prayers in the evening ; for example , the nordic lutheran churches . since tradition holds that jesus was born at night ( based in luke 2:6-8 ) , midnight mass is celebrated on christmas eve , traditionally at midnight , in commemoration of his birth . the idea of jesus being born at night is reflected in the fact that christmas eve is referred to as heilige nacht ( holy night ) in german , nochebuena ( the good night ) in spanish and similarly in other expressions of christmas spirituality , such as the song silent night . many other varying cultural traditions and experiences are also associated with christmas eve around the world , including the gathering of family and friends , the singing of christmas carols , the illumination and enjoyment of christmas lights , trees , and other decorations , the wrapping , exchange and opening of gifts , and general preparation for christmas day . legendary christmas gift-bearing figures including santa claus , father christmas , christkind , and saint nicholas are also often said to depart for their annual journey to deliver presents to children around the world on christmas eve , although until the protestant introduction of christkind in 16th-century europe , forbes , bruce david , christmas : a candid history , university of california press , 2007 , , pp . & nbsp ; 68–79 . such figures were said to instead deliver presents on the eve of saint nicholas day ( 6 december ) .