gender identity is the personal sense of one 's own gender . sexual orientation and gender expression in social work practice , edited by deana f . morrow and lori messinger ( 2006 , , p . 8 : '' gender identity refers to an individual 's personal sense of identity as masculine or feminine , or some combination thereof . '' gender identity can correlate with a person 's assigned sex at birth or can differ from it . gender expression typically reflects a person 's gender identity , but this is not always the case . while a person may express behaviors , attitudes , and appearances consistent with a particular gender role , such expression may not necessarily reflect their gender identity . the term gender identity was originally coined by robert j . stoller in 1964 . all societies have a set of gender categories that can serve as the basis of a person 's self-identity in relation to other members of society . v . m . moghadam , patriarchy and the politics of gender in modernising societies , in international sociology , 1992 : '' all societies have gender systems . '' in most societies , there is a basic division between gender attributes assigned to males and females , a gender binary to which most people adhere and which includes expectations of masculinity and femininity in all aspects of sex and gender : biological sex , gender identity , and gender expression . jack david eller , culture and diversity in the united states ( 2015 , , p . 137 : '' most western societies , including the united states , traditionally operate with a binary notion of sex/gender '' some people do not identify with some , or all , of the aspects of gender assigned to their biological sex ; for example , '' transvestites who do not identify with the dress assigned to their sex existed in almost all societies . '' ( g . o . mackenzie , transgender nation ( 1994 , , p . 43 . ) '' there are records of males and females crossing over throughout history and in virtually every culture . it is simply a naturally occurring part of all societies . '' ( charles zastrow , introduction to social work and social welfare : empowering people ( 2013 , , p . 234 , quoting the north alabama gender center . ) some of those people are transgender , non-binary gender . some societies have third gender categories . gender identity is usually formed by age three . after age three , it is extremely difficult to change gender identity . both biological and social factors have been suggested to influence its formation .