the fox broadcasting company , commonly referred to as the fox network or simply fox , is an american commercial broadcasting television network owned by the fox ( company ) . though it was officially launched on october 9 , 1986 , fox began its official primetime setup on april 5 , 1987 , with the series married . with children and the tracey ullman show airing that night . as of october 2012 , fox maintains 19.5-hours of programming per week . the animated comedy series the simpsons is one of fox 's most popular shows , becoming the network 's first series to rank among the top 30-highest-rated shows of a television season after its original debut , and is the longest running sitcom , as well as animated series , of all time , contributing to the channel 's success . according to lanford beard of entertainment weekly , '' the simpsons turned fox from the little network that could into the little network that could not be ignored . '' the science fiction television series the x-files also contributed to the network 's success , which led to two spin-offs millennium and the lone gunmen . fox began airing in high-definition on september 12 , 2004 , with a series of nfl ( nfl ) american football games . fox had a programming block for children titled fox kids , which ran from september 8 , 1990 to september 7 , 2002 . unlike the '' three larger networks '' , which aired primetime programming from 8 to 11 p.m . ( est ) mondays to saturdays and 7 to 11 p.m . ( est ) sundays , fox has traditionally avoided programming in the 10 p.m . ( est ) time interval , leaving that hour to affiliates to program locally . on april 21 , 2012 , fox celebrated its 25th-anniversary , with a two-hour television special featuring people related to fox and its shows . it presented fox 's programs 24 , american idol , cops , family guy , married . with children , the simpsons , and the x-files , among other programs . the network 's adult cartoons are listed under the animation domination banner , which is a sunday night programming block . fox is a full member of the north american broadcasters association ( naba ) and the national association of broadcasters ( nab ) .