malacca had a well-defined government with a set of laws . on top of the sultanate 's hierarchy sat the sultan and he was an absolute monarch . the earlier srivijayan concept of kingship that the king 's authority to rule was based on legitimate lineage still prevailed , and with the coming of islam , it was reintroduced with the name daulat ( sovereignty ) . malacca 's legal codes identified four main state officials appointed by the sultan . below the sultan was a bendahara , a position similar to that of a vizier , who acted as an advisor to the sultan . it was the highest-ranking office that could be held by any common people in malacca . bendahara was also responsible for ensuring cordial relations with foreign states . malacca 's fifth bendahara , tun perak , excelled in both war and diplomacy . twice during the reign of sultan muzaffar shah , tun perak successfully led malaccan armed forces in repelling siamese attacks on malacca . when sultan mansur shah ascended the throne , acting on tun perak 's advice , he agreed to dispatch a peace envoy to siam . tun perak also advised the sultan to marry the daughter of the king of majapahit , malacca 's traditional enemy . next to bendahara was a state treasurer , called penghulu bendahari . later comes the temenggung which more or less a chief of public police and state security . after temenggung , a laksamanas authority is paramount . he was the head of the navy and also chief emissary of the sultan . he ensured that the malacca straits was safe and enforced the undang-undang laut melaka ( 'maritime laws of malacca ' ) . malacca 's most prominent laksamana was the legendary hang tuah . at the bottom of this nobility structure is the four shahbandars ( 'harbour masters ' ) for the different communities in the port – one focused exclusively on handling the affairs of the gujarati traders ; another was responsible for traders from southern india , bengal , burma and pasai ; a third for traders from maritime southeast asia ; and fourth for traders from annam , china and the ryukyu islands . as the gujaratis were the most dominant , numbering up to 1000 traders , their shahbandar was regarded as the most important of the four . lesser titled state officials were also appointed . they were known as the orang besar . in addition , a governor called the mandulika oversaw the administration of appanages and territories annexed by conquest . the sultanate was governed with several set of laws . the formal legal text of traditional malacca consisted of the undang-undang melaka ( laws of malacca ) , variously called the hukum kanun melaka and risalat hukum kanun , and the undang-undang laut melaka ( the maritime laws of malacca ' ) . the laws as written in the legal digests went through an evolutionary process . the legal rules that eventually evolved were shaped by three main influences , namely the early non-indigenous hindu/buddhist tradition , islam and the indigenous '' adat '' .