old chinese : dzin ) in the 3rd century bc , but existed as a state on the furthest west of china since the 9th century bc . '' there are reasons however for believing the word was bestowed at a much earlier date , for it occurs in the laws of manu , which assert the chinas to be degenerate kshatriyas , and the mahabharat , compositions many centuries older that imperial dynasty of . and this name may have yet possibly been connected with the ts'in , or some monarchy of the like title ; for that dynasty had reigned locally in shen si from the ninth century before our era . '' this is still the most commonly held theory , although the etymology is still a matter of debate according to the oxford english dictionary , and many other suggestions have been mooted . the existence of the word cīna in ancient hindu texts was noted by the sanskrit scholar hermann jacobi who pointed out its use in the book 2 of arthashastra with reference to silk and woven cloth produced by the country of cīna , although textual analysis suggests that book 2 may not have been written long before 150 ad . the word is also found in other sanskrit texts such as the mahābhārata and the manusmṛti . the indologist patrick olivelle argued that the word cīnā may not have been known in india before the first century bc , nevertheless he agreed that it probably referred to qin but thought that the word itself was derived from a central asian language . liu , lydia he , the clash of empires , p . 77 . '' scholars have dated the earliest mentions of cīna to the rāmāyana and the mahābhārata and to other sanskrit sources such as the hindu laws of manu . '' some chinese and indian scholars argued for the state of jing , another name for chu ) as the likely origin of the name . another suggestion , made by geoff wade , is that the cīnāh in sanskrit texts refers to an ancient kingdom centered in present-day guizhou , called yelang , in the south tibeto-burman highlands . the inhabitants referred to themselves as zina according to wade . '' this thesis also helps explain the existence of cīna in the indic laws of manu and the mahabharata , likely dating well before qin shihuangdi . '' the term china can also be used to refer to : the modern states known as the people 's republic of china ( prc ) and ( before the 1970s ) the republic of china ( roc ) '' mainland china '' / , zhōngguó dàlù in mandarin ) , which is the territory of the prc minus the two special administrative regions of hong kong and macau ; '' china proper '' , a term used to refer to the historical heartlands of china without peripheral areas like manchuria , inner mongolia , tibet , and xinjiang in economic contexts , '' greater china '' / , dà zhōnghuá dìqū ) is intended to be a neutral and non-political way to refer to mainland china , hong kong , macau and taiwan . sinologists usually use '' chinese '' in a more restricted sense , akin to the classical usage of zhongguo , to the han ethnic group , which makes up the bulk of the population in china and of the overseas chinese .