geopolitics ( from greek γῆ gê '' earth , land '' and πολιτική politikḗ '' politics '' ) is the study of the effects of earth 's geography ( human and physical ) on politics and international relations . while geopolitics usually refers to country and relations between them , it may also focus on two other kinds of states : de & nbsp ; facto independent states with limited international recognition and relations between administrative division , such as the federated states that make up a federation , confederation or a quasi-federal system . at the level of international relations , geopolitics is a method of studying foreign policy to understand , explain and predict international political behavior through geographical variables . these include area studies , climate , topography , demography , natural resources , and applied science of the region being evaluated . geopolitics focuses on political power linked to geographic space . in particular , territorial waters and land territory in correlation with diplomatic history . topics of geopolitics include relations between the interests of international political actors focused within an area , a space , or a geographical element , relations which create a geopolitical system . vladimir toncea , 2006 , '' geopolitical evolution of borders in danube basin '' critical geopolitics deconstructs classical geopolitical theories , by showing their political/ideological functions for great powers . there are some works that discuss the geopolitics of renewable energy . according to christopher gogwilt and other researchers , the term is currently being used to describe a broad spectrum of concepts , in a general sense used as '' a synonym for international political relations '' , but more specifically '' to imply the global structure of such relations '' ; this usage builds on an '' early-twentieth-century term for a pseudoscience of political geography '' and other pseudoscientific theories of historical and geographic determinism .