the treaty of alliance , also known as the franco-american treaty , was a alliance between the ancien régime and the united states of america formed amid the american revolutionary war with great britain . it was signed by delegates of king louis xvi and the second continental congress in paris on february 6 , 1778 , along with the treaty of amity and commerce and a secret clause providing for the entry of other european allies ; preamble to treaty of alliance . '' particularly in case great britain in resentment of that connection and of the good correspondence which is the object of the treaty of amity and commerce , should break the peace with france , either by direct hostilities , or by hindering her commerce and navigation , in a manner contrary to the rights of nations , and the peace subsisting between the two crowns . '' together these instruments are sometimes known as the franco-american alliance or the treaties of alliance . the agreements marked the official entry of the united states on the world stage , and formalized france in the american revolutionary war that was to be decisive in america 's victory . the treaty of alliance was signed immediately after the treaty of amity and commerce , in which france was the first nation to formally recognize the u.s . as a sovereign state ; morocco was the first country to de facto recognize american independence through a 1777 decree by sultan mohammad iii to provide safe harbor to u.s . commercial vessels . however , relations were not formalized by treaty until 1786 . this treaty had also established mutual commercial treaty between the two nations , in direct defiance of the british navigation act , which restricted american access to foreign markets . in contemplation that these commercial and diplomatic ties would result in hostilities between france and britain , the treaty of alliance guaranteed french military support in just such an event . preamble of the treaty of alliance it also forbade either nation from making a separate peace with britain , and was contemplated as a permanent defensive pact . the successful negotiation of the treaty of alliance and its sister agreements is considered the '' single most important diplomatic success of the colonists '' , since it helped secure vital aid in the war with britain ; the treaties were immediately followed by substantial material , military , and financial support to the american cause . some historians consider the signing of the treaty of alliance as marking america 's de jure recognition as an independent nation . david m . golove and daniel j . hulsebosch , a civilized nation : the early american constitution , the law of nations , and the pursuit of international recognition , new york law review , october 2010 , 85 n.y.u . l . rev . 932 , 953 . notwithstanding its significance , subsequent complications with the treaty of alliance led to its annulment by the turn of the 19th century , with the united states eschewing formal military alliance until the second world war .