né bottom ; born october 28 , 1974 ) is an american actor , environmentalist , animal rights activist , and producer . he has received numerous accolades , including an academy award and two golden globe awards . in 2020 , he was ranked no . 12 on the list of the 25 greatest actors of the 21st century by the new york times . as a child , phoenix started acting in television with his brother river and sister summer . his first major film role was in spacecamp ( 1986 ) . during that period , he was credited as leaf phoenix , a name he gave himself . he later went back to his original name and received positive reviews for his supporting work in the comedy-drama film to die for ( 1995 ) and the period film quills ( 2000 ) . he received wider attention for his portrayal of commodus in the historical drama film gladiator ( 2000 ) , for which he was nominated for the academy award for best supporting actor . he subsequently earned best actor nominations for portraying musician johnny cash in walk the line ( 2005 ) and an alcoholic war veteran in the master ( 2012 ) , and won for his lead performance as the title character in joker ( 2019 ) . his other films include the horror films signs ( 2002 ) and the village ( 2004 ) , the historical drama hotel rwanda ( 2004 ) , the romantic drama her ( 2013 ) , the crime satire inherent vice ( 2014 ) , and the psychological thriller you were never really here ( 2017 ) , for which he won the cannes film festival award for best actor . phoenix has also ventured into directing music videos , as well as producing films and television shows . for recording the soundtrack to walk the line , he won the grammy award for best compilation soundtrack for visual media . he is a social activist and has lent his support to several charities and humanitarian organizations . he is on the board of directors for the lunchbox fund , a non-profit organization which provides daily meals to school students in the south african town of soweto . he is also known for his animal rights advocacy ; he has been a vegan since the age of three and often campaigns with peta and in defense of animals .