when rhodes became a member of the cape parliament , the chief goal of the assembly was to help decide the future of basutoland . the ministry of gordon sprigg was trying to restore order after the 1880 rebellion known as the gun war . the sprigg ministry had precipitated the revolt by applying its policy of disarming all native africans to those of the basotho nation , who resisted . in 1890 , rhodes became prime minister of the cape colony . he introduced various acts of parliament to push black people from their lands and make way for industrial development . rhodes 's view was that black people needed to be driven off their land to '' stimulate them to labour '' and to change their habits . '' it must be brought home to them '' , rhodes said , '' that in future nine-tenths of them will have to spend their lives in manual labour , and the sooner that is brought home to them the better . '' in 1892 , rhodes 's franchise and ballot act raised the property requirements from a relatively low £25 to a significantly higher £75 which had a disproportionate effect on the previously growing number of enfranchised black people in the cape under the cape qualified franchise that had been in force since 1853 . history of south africa timeline ( 1485–1975 ) by limiting the amount of land which black africans were legally allowed to hold in the glen grey act of 1894 , rhodes further disenfranchised the black population . to quote richard dowden , most would now '' find it almost impossible to get back on the list because of the legal limit on the amount of land they could hold '' . in addition , rhodes was an early architect of the natives land act , 1913 , which would limit the areas of the country where black africans were allowed to settle to less than 10 % . at the time , rhodes would argue that '' the native is to be treated as a child and denied the franchise . we must adopt a system of despotism , such as works in india , in our relations with the barbarism of south africa . '' rhodes also introduced educational reform to the area . his policies were instrumental in the development of british empire policies in south africa , such as the hut tax . rhodes did not , however , have direct political power over the independent boer republic of the transvaal . he often disagreed with the transvaal government 's policies , which he considered unsupportive of mine-owners ' interests . in 1895 , believing he could use his influence to overthrow the boer government , rhodes supported the jameson raid , an unsuccessful attempt to create an uprising in the transvaal that had the tacit approval of secretary of state for the colonies joseph chamberlain . the raid was a catastrophic failure . it forced cecil rhodes to resign as prime minister of the cape colony , sent his oldest brother col . frank rhodes to jail in transvaal convicted of high treason and nearly sentenced to death , and contributed to the outbreak of the second boer war . in 1899 , rhodes was sued by a man named burrows for falsely representing the purpose of the raid and thereby convincing him to participate in the raid . burrows was severely wounded and had to have his leg amputated . his suit for £3,000 in damages was successful . burrows v . rhodes and jameson , 1899 1 q b 816 south africa military history