the international union for conservation of nature ( iucn ) red list of threatened species ( also known as the iucn red list or red data book ) , founded in 1964 , is the world 's most comprehensive inventory of the global conservation status of species . it uses a set of criteria to evaluate the extinction risk of thousands of species and subspecies . these criteria are relevant to all species and all regions of the world . with its strong scientific base , the iucn red list is recognized as the most authoritative guide to the status of biological diversity . a series of regional red lists are produced by countries or organizations , which assess the risk of extinction to species within a political management unit . the iucn red list is set upon precise criteria to evaluate the extinction risk of thousands of species and subspecies . these criteria are relevant to all species and all regions of the world . the aim is to convey the urgency of conservation issues to the public and policy makers , as well as help the international community to try to reduce species extinction . according to iucn the formally stated goals of the red list are to provide scientifically based information on the status of species and subspecies at a global level , to draw attention to the magnitude and importance of threatened biodiversity , to influence national and international policy and decision-making , and to provide information to guide actions to conserve biological diversity . cites ( convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ) , joint meeting of the animals and plants committees , shepherdstown ( united states of america ) , 7–9 december 2000 , retrieved 14 november 2012 major species assessors include birdlife international , the institute of zoology ( the research division of the zoological society of london ) , the world conservation monitoring centre , and many specialist groups within the iucn species survival commission ( ssc ) . collectively , assessments by these organizations and groups account for nearly half the species on the red list . the iucn aims to have the category of every species re-evaluated at least every ten years , or every five years if possible . this is done in a peer reviewed manner through iucn species survival commission specialist groups , which are red list authorities responsible for a species , group of species or specific geographic area , or in the case of birdlife international , an entire class ( bird ) . the number of species which have been assessed for the red list has been increasing over time . as of 2019 , of 105,000 species surveyed , 28,338 are considered at risk of extinction because of human activity , in particular overfishing , hunting and land development .