scaffolding , also called scaffold or staging , '' staging , vbl . n . '' . def . 1 . oxford english dictionary second edition on cd-rom ( v . 4.0 ) © oxford university press 2009 is a temporary structure used to support a work crew and materials to aid in the construction , maintenance and repair of buildings , bridges and all other man-made structures . scaffolds are widely used on site to get access to heights and areas that would be otherwise hard to get to . unsafe scaffolding has the potential to result in death or serious injury . scaffolding is also used in adapted forms for formwork and shoring , grandstand seating , concert stages , access/viewing towers , exhibition stands , ski ramps , half pipes and art projects . there are five main types of scaffolding used worldwide today . these are tube and coupler ( fitting ) components , prefabricated modular system scaffold components , h-frame / facade modular system scaffolds , timber scaffolds and bamboo scaffolds ( particularly in china and india ) . each type is made from several components which often include : a base jack or plate which is a load-bearing base for the scaffold . the standard , the upright component with connector joins . the ledger , a horizontal brace . the transom , a horizontal cross-section load-bearing component which holds the batten , board , or decking unit . brace diagonal and/or cross section bracing component . batten or board decking component used to make the working platform . coupler , a fitting used to join components together . scaffold tie , used to tie in the scaffold to structures . brackets , used to extend the width of working platforms . specialized components used to aid in their use as a temporary structure often include heavy duty load bearing transoms , ladders or stairway units for the ingress and egress of the scaffold , beams ladder/unit types used to span obstacles and rubbish chutes used to remove unwanted materials from the scaffold or construction project .