bushu dima or simply bushu is a major harvest festival of the dimasa people . this festival is celebrated during the end of january . officially 27 january has been declared as the day of bushu dima festival . the dimasa people celebrate their festival by playing musical instruments- khram ( a type of drum ) , muri ( a kind of huge long flute ) . the people dances to the different tunes called '' murithai '' and each dance has got its name , the prominent being the '' baidima '' there are three types of bushu celebrated among the dimasas jidap , surem and hangsou . chavang kut is a post harvesting festival of the kuki people . the festival is celebrated on the first day of november every year . hence , this particular day has been officially declared as a restricted holiday by the assam government . in the past , the celebration was primarily important in the religio-cultural sense . the rhythmic movements of the dances in the festival were inspired by animals , agricultural techniques and showed their relationship with ecology . today , the celebration witnesses the shifting of stages and is revamped to suit new contexts and interpretations . the traditional dances which form the core of the festival is now performed in out-of-village settings and are staged in a secular public sphere . in assam , the kukis mainly reside in the two autonomous districts of dima hasao and karbi anglong . moreover , there are other important traditional festivals being celebrated every year on different occasions at different places . many of these are celebrated by different ethno-cultural groups ( sub and sister cultures ) . some of these are : other few yearly celebrations are doul utsav of barpeta , brahmaputra beach festival , guwahati , kaziranga elephant festival , kaziranga and dehing patkai festival , lekhapani , karbi youth festival of diphu and international jatinga festival , jatinga can not be forgotten . few yearly mela 's like jonbeel mela , began in the 15th century by the ahom kings , ambubachi mela , guwahati etc . lachit divas ' is celebrated to promote the ideals of lachit borphukan – the legendary general of assam 's history . sarbananda sonowal , the chief minister of assam took part in the lachit divas celebration at the statue of lachit borphukan at brahmaputra riverfront on 24 november 2017 . he said , the first countrywide celebration of 'lachit divas ' would take place in new delhi followed by state capitals such as hyderabad , bangalore and kolkata in a phased manner .