white is a racial classification and skin color specifier , generally used for people of european origin ; although the definition can vary depending on context , nationality , and point of view . this term has at times been expanded to encompass persons of south asian , west asian , and north african descent , persons who are often considered '' non-white '' in other contexts in the united states . it has also been alleged that , in the united states , people of southern european and even irish descent have been excluded from this category , although this idea has been contested . the new york times ( 12 october 2019 ) : '' how italians became 'white ' '' . retrieved 9 july 2020 the usage of '' white people '' or a '' white race '' for a large group of mainly or exclusively european populations , defined by their light skin , among other physical characteristics , and contrasting with '' black '' , '' red '' , '' brown '' , '' yellow '' , and other '' colored '' people or '' person of color '' , originated in the 17th century . prior to this , europeans also described people from east asia as being '' white '' . it was only during the 19th century that this vague category was transformed in a scientific racism of race and skin color relations . the concept of a unified white race did not achieve universal acceptance in europe when it first came into use in the 17th century , or in the centuries afterward . nazi germany regarded some european peoples such as slavs as racially distinct from themselves . prior to the modern age , no european peoples regarded themselves as '' white '' , but rather defined their race , ancestry , or ethnicity in terms of their nationality . moreover , there is no accepted standard for determining the geographic barrier between white and non-white people . contemporary anthropologists and other scientists , while recognizing the reality of biological variation between different human populations , regard the concept of a unified , distinguishable '' white race '' as socially constructed . as a group with several different potential boundaries , it is an example of a fuzzy concept . the whiteness studies has particular resonance in the anglosphere : e.g . , in the united states ( white americans ) , canada ( white canadians ) , australia ( white australians ) , new zealand ( white new zealanders ) , the united kingdom ( white british ) , and south africa ( white south africans ) . in much of the rest of europe , the distinction between race and nationality is more blurred ; when people are asked to describe their race or ancestry , they often describe it in terms of their nationality . various social constructions of whiteness have been significant to national identity , public policy , religion , census , racial segregation , affirmative action , white privilege , eugenics , racial marginalization , and racial quotas . the term '' white race '' or '' white people '' entered the major european languages in the later 17th century , in the context of racialized slavery and unequal social status in the european colonies . description of populations as '' white '' in reference to their skin color predates this notion and is occasionally found in greco-roman ethnography and other ancient or medieval sources , but these societies did not have any notion of a white , pan-european race . scholarship on race distinguishes the modern concept from pre-modern descriptions , which focused on physical complexion rather than race . '' on both sides of the chronological divide between the modern and the pre-modern ( wherever it may lie ) , there is today a remarkable consensus that the earlier vocabularies of difference are innocent of race . ''