automation describes a wide range of technologies that reduce human intervention in processes . human intervention is reduced by predetermining decision criteria , subprocess relationships , and related actions — and embodying those predeterminations in machines . automation , or automatic control , includes the use of various control systems for operating equipment such as machinery , processes in factory , boilers , and heat-treating ovens , switching on telephone networks , steering , and stabilization of ships , aircraft , and other applications and vehicles with reduced human intervention . automation covers applications ranging from a household thermostat controlling a boiler , to a large industrial control system with tens of thousands of input measurements and output control signals . in control complexity , it can range from simple on-off control to multi-variable high-level algorithms . in the simplest type of an automatic control loop , a controller compares a measured value of a process with a desired set value and processes the resulting error signal to change some input to the process , in such a way that the process stays at its set point despite disturbances . this closed-loop control is an application of negative feedback to a system . the mathematical basis of control theory was begun in the 18th century and advanced rapidly in the 20th . automation has been achieved by various means including mechanical , hydraulic , pneumatic , electrical , electronics , and computers , usually in combination . complicated systems , such as modern factories , airplanes , and ships typically use all these combined techniques . the benefit of automation includes labor savings , savings in electricity , savings in material costs , and improvements to quality , accuracy , and precision . the world bank 's world development report 2019 shows evidence that the new industries and jobs in the technology sector outweigh the economic effects of workers being displaced by automation . job losses and social mobility blamed on automation has been cited as one of many factors in the resurgence of nationalist , protectionism and populism politics in the us , uk and france , among other countries since the 2010s . such tasks include : redaction data extraction and document synthesis / reporting contract management natural language search customer , employee , and stakeholder onboarding manual activities and verifications follow-up and email communications