an evoked potential or evoked response is an electrical potential in a specific pattern recorded from a specific part of the nervous system , especially the brain , of a human or other animals following presentation of a stimulus such as a light flash or a pure tone . different types of potentials result from stimuli of different modalities and types . ep is distinct from spontaneous potentials as detected by electroencephalography ( eeg ) , electromyography ( emg ) , or other electrophysiology recording method . such potentials are useful for electrodiagnosis and monitoring that include detections of disease and drug-related sensory dysfunction and intraoperative monitoring of sensory pathway integrity . evoked potential amplitudes tend to be low , ranging from less than a microvolt to several microvolts , compared to tens of microvolts for eeg , millivolts for emg , and often close to 20 millivolts for ecg . to resolve these low-amplitude potentials against the background of ongoing eeg , ecg , emg , and other biological signals and ambient noise , signal averaging is usually required . the signal is time-locked to the stimulus and most of the noise occurs randomly , allowing the noise to be averaged out with averaging of repeated responses . signals can be recorded from cerebral cortex , brain stem , spinal cord , peripheral nerves and muscles . usually the term '' evoked potential '' is reserved for responses involving either recording from , or stimulation of , central nervous system structures . thus evoked compound motor action potentials ( cmap ) or sensory nerve action potentials ( snap ) as used in nerve conduction study ( ncs ) are generally not thought of as evoked potentials , though they do meet the above definition . evoked potential is different from event-related potential ( erp ) , although the terms are sometimes used synonymously , because erp has higher latency , and is associated with higher cognitive processing . evoked potentials are mainly classified by the type of stimulus : somatosensory , auditory , visual . but they could be also classified according to stimulus frequency , wave latencies , potential origin , location , and derivation .