david garrick ( 19 february 1717 – 20 january 1779 ) was an english actor , playwright , actor-manager and producer who influenced nearly all aspects of theatrical practice throughout the 18th century , and was a pupil and friend of samuel johnson . he appeared in a number of amateur theatricals , and with his appearance in the title role of shakespeare 's richard iii , audiences and managers began to take notice . impressed by his portrayals of richard iii and a number of other roles , charles fleetwood engaged garrick for a season at the theatre royal , drury lane . he remained with the drury lane company for the next five years and purchased a share of the theatre with james lacy . this purchase inaugurated 29 years of garrick 's management of the drury lane , during which time it rose to prominence as one of the leading theatres in europe . at his death , three years after his retirement from drury lane and the stage , he was given a lavish public funeral at westminster abbey where he was laid to rest in poets ' corner . as an actor , garrick promoted realistic acting that departed from the bombastic style that was entrenched when he first came to prominence . his acting delighted many audiences and his direction of many of the top actors of the english stage influenced their styles as well . during his tenure as manager of drury lane , garrick also sought to reform audience behaviour . while this led to some discontent among the theatre-going public , many of his reforms eventually did take hold . garrick also sought reform in production matters , bringing an overarching consistency to productions that included set design , costumes and even special effects . garrick 's influence extended into the literary side of theatre as well . critics are almost unanimous in saying he was not a good playwright , but his work in bringing shakespeare to contemporary audiences is notable . in addition , he adapted many older plays in the repertoire that might have been forgotten . these included many plays of the restoration era . indeed , while influencing the theatre towards a better standard he also gained a better reputation for theatre people . this accomplishment led samuel johnson to remark that '' his profession made him rich and he made his profession respectable . ''