over time , tensions within the band developed between dino cazares and the other members , particularly burton c . bell and raymond herrera . when asked about the breakup in may 2002 , cazares made claims and allegations against bell and the other members , stating that fear factory could continue without christian olde wolbers and that he and raymond herrera were primarily motivated by money . herrera responded to these allegations on behalf of the other band members , saying that cazares was motivated by money and emphasizing olde wolbers ' influence on the band 's sound . according to herrera , the other band members would often come up with new ideas they wanted to incorporate into fear factory 's sound , but their suggestions were dismissed or openly ridiculed by cazares , causing a rift between him and the other members that ultimately led to the band 's breakup . in the same interview , herrera also revealed that cazares had attempted to control the direction of the band by manipulating their business management and record company , and had openly lied to the other members about his actions . herrera and olde wolbers reunited later in 2002 and laid the foundations for the return of fear factory . cazares was then permanently out of the band . bell was approached with their demo recordings and was impressed enough to rejoin the band and fear factory was re-formed . olde wolbers switched to guitar and byron stroud of strapping young lad was approached to join the band as a bassist . he was a member from 2003 until 2012 . cazares continued recording and performing with his side project called asesino , a mexican deathgrind band . in 2007 , he also started a new group called divine heresy . fear factory made its live return as the mystery band at the australian big day out festival in january 2004 , followed by its first american shows since re-forming on the spring jägermeister tour with slipknot and chimaira . the new lineup 's first album archetype was released on april 20 , 2004 , through new record label liquid 8 records based in minnesota . with archetype , fear factory returned to an alternative , industrial , metal sound ; the album is generally considered to be a strong 'return-to-form ' record , if not a particularly innovative effort , with most of the trademark elements of the band firmly in place . videos were shot for the songs '' cyberwaste '' , '' archetype '' , and '' bite the hand that bleeds '' ; the latter featured on the saw ( soundtrack ) . the band performed on further tours with lamb of god and mastodon in the us and with mnemic in europe . the new fear factory has largely abandoned the direct '' man versus machine '' theme prevalent on earlier releases in favor of subjects such as religion , war , and corporatism .