william de st-calais ( died 2 january 1096 ) was a medieval norman monk , abbot of the abbey of saint-vincent in le mans in maine , who was nominated by king william i of england as bishop of durham in 1080 . during his term as bishop , st-calais replaced the canons of his cathedral chapter with monks , and began the construction of durham cathedral . in addition to his ecclesiastical duties , he served as a commissioner for the domesday book . he was also a councilor and advisor to both king william i and his son , king william ii , known as william rufus . following william rufus ' accession to the throne in 1087 , st-calais is considered by scholars to have been the new king 's chief advisor . however , when the king 's uncle , odo of bayeux , raised a rebellion against the king in 1088 , st-calais was implicated in the revolt . william rufus laid siege to st-calais in the bishop 's stronghold of durham , and later put him on trial for treason . a contemporary record of this trial , the de iniusta vexacione willelmi episcopi primi , is the earliest surviving detailed contemporary report of an english state-trial . imprisoned briefly , st-calais was allowed to go into exile after his castle at durham was surrendered to the king . he went to normandy , where he became a leading advisor to robert curthose , duke of normandy , the elder brother of william rufus . by 1091 , st-calais had returned to england and regained royal favour . in england , st-calais once more became a leading advisor to the king . in 1093 he negotiated with anselm of canterbury , concerning anselm 's becoming archbishop of canterbury ; in 1095 it was st-calais who prosecuted the royal case against anselm after he had become archbishop . during his bishopric , st-calais stocked the cathedral library with books , especially canon law texts . he was also active in defending the north of england against scots raids . before his death , he had made his peace with anselm , who blessed and consoled st-calais on his deathbed .