in november 1978 , echo & the bunnymen made their debut at liverpool 's eric 's club , appearing as the opening act for the teardrop explodes . the band played one song , a 20-minute version of '' monkeys '' which was entitled '' i bagsy yours '' at the time . echo & the bunnymen 's debut single '' the pictures on my wall '' was released on bill drummond & david balfe 's zoo records in may 1979 , the b-side being the mcculloch/cope collaboration '' read it in books '' ( also recorded by the teardrop explodes approximately six months later as the b-side of their final zoo records single '' treason '' ) . mcculloch has subsequently denied , on more than one occasion , that cope had any involvement with the writing of this song . with the group now gaining wider attention , they were invited to record a four-song set for the bbc 's john peel show on august 22 , at which time they were still using a drum machine . this was the first of six live sets they would cut for the peel show between 1979 and 1983 . by the time of their debut album , 1980 's crocodiles ( july 1980 ) , the drum machine had been replaced by a real drummer , trinidad-born pete de freitas . unlike the other band members , who were from working class liverpool families , de freitas was considered '' posh '' - he came from an affluent background , grew up in the south of england , and attended an elite private school , but his affable and outgoing manner was a welcome addition for his famously fractious bandmates , whose conflicts soon became the stuff of legend . de freitas met the trio at their september 15 , 1979 gig at eric 's in liverpool and immediately joined the band , although his october 12 live debut with them at london 's electric ballroom was less than auspicious -- supporting hugely popular ska bands madness and bad manners , the bunnymen proved an uncomfortable fit , and they were booed off after just two songs . the lead single from the album , '' rescue '' ( produced by ian broudie ) only reached no . 62 on the uk singles chart but the album ( co-produced by manager bill drummond and his business partner david balfe ( the teardrop explodes ) broke into the top 20 , reaching no . 17 , and garnering wide critical acclaim . eschewing the traditional '' pin-up '' cover shot , crocodiles featured an atmospheric cover image , which showed the band posed in a mysterious woodland setting , lit by hidden coloured lights . designed by martyn atkins and photographed by brian griffin , it became the first in a coordinated series of elemental-themed album covers by atkins and griffin , which spanned their first four lps , each depicting the band posed at some distance from the camera , in a visually striking natural setting -- a forest ( crocodiles ) , a beach at sunset ( heaven up here ) , a frozen waterfall in iceland ( porcupine ) , and a subterranean river ( ocean rain ) . it would not be until their fifth , self-titled album that the band employed a traditional group portrait .