utah lake is a shallow freshwater lake in center of utah county , utah , united states . it lies in utah valley , surrounded by the provo-orem metropolitan area . the lake 's only river outlet , the jordan river , is a tributary of the great salt lake . evaporation accounts for 42 % of the outflow of the lake , which leaves the lake slightly saline . the elevation of the lake is at above sea level . if the lake 's water level rises above that , the pumps and gates on the jordan river are left open . image : utah lake.jpg thumb left utah lake and utah valley the first european to see utah lake was father silvestre vélez de escalante in 1776 . he stayed with the timpanogots band of ute tribe for three days . the timpanogots were later integrated with the mormon settlers or expelled from the area between the 1850s and 1870s . the fish of the lake were overharvested by the settlers and subsequently restocked with non-native species . although thirteen species of fish were native to the lake , only the utah sucker and the critically endangered june sucker remain . the dominant species in the lake is the common carp , introduced in 1883 as an alternative to the overharvested native fish . the carp is now estimated at 90 % of the biomass of the lake and is contributing to a decline in native fish populations by severely altering the ecosystem . pollution has also caused problems with the lake 's ecosystem . raw sewage was dumped into the lake as late as 1967 . pollution problems still remain ; the lake 's phosphorus and mineral salt levels are in violation of the clean water act . in recent years , the lake has been prone to harmful algal blooms or habs . utah lake is managed cooperatively by the utah division of forestry , fire & state lands and the utah lake commission . the division manages public use and issues permits for commercial users of the lakebed and shoreline while the commission facilitates development . the lakebed and surrounding shoreline is made up of state sovereign lands . utah lake is one of three lakes in the state that were deemed '' navigable '' at statehood and granted to the state of utah . sovereign lands are managed under the public trust doctrine . the utah state legislature has designated the division of forestry , fire & state lands as the executive authority for the management of sovereign lands , and the state 's mineral estates on lands other than school and institutional trust lands . sovereign lands are defined by the utah state legislature as “ those lands lying below the ordinary high water mark of navigable bodies of water at the date of statehood and owned by the state by virtue of its sovereignty . ” the commission was created by state statute in utah 's 2007 general legislative session , house concurrent resolution 1 , under authority of the interlocal cooperation act . the commission is funded and empowered by 17 area governments , including ; utah county and its municipalities , the central utah water conservancy district , and three state agencies . founded in 2007 , the commission seeks to promote multiple public uses of the lake , facilitate orderly planning and development in and around the lake , and enable individual commission members to govern their own areas .