as counterpoint , twain 's essay on '' the literary offenses of fenimore cooper '' offers a much kinder view of indians . '' no , other indians would have noticed these things , but cooper 's indians never notice anything . cooper thinks they are marvelous creatures for noticing , but he was almost always in error about his indians . there was seldom a sane one among them . '' twain , mark , in defense of harriet shelley and other essays , harper & brothers , 1918 . p . 68 in his later travelogue following the equator ( 1897 ) , twain observes that in colonized lands all over the world , '' savages '' have always been wronged by '' whites '' in the most merciless ways , such as '' robbery , humiliation , and slow , slow murder , through poverty and the white man 's whiskey '' ; his conclusion is that '' there are many humorous things in this world ; among them the white man 's notion that he is less savage than the other savages '' . twain , mark . 2008 . following the equator . pp . 94–98 in an expression that captures his east indian experiences , he wrote , '' so far as i am able to judge nothing has been left undone , either by man or nature , to make india the most extraordinary country that the sun visits on his rounds . where every prospect pleases , and only man is vile . '' twain was also a staunch supporter of women 's rights and an active campaigner for women 's suffrage . his '' votes for women '' speech , in which he pressed for the granting of voting rights to women , is considered one of the most famous in history . helen keller benefited from twain 's support as she pursued her college education and publishing despite her disabilities and financial limitations . the two were friends for roughly 16 years . through twain 's efforts , the connecticut legislature voted a pension for prudence crandall , since 1995 connecticut 's official heroine , for her efforts towards the education of young african-american women in connecticut . twain also offered to purchase for her use her former house in canterbury , home of the canterbury female boarding school , but she declined .