it contained the song '' institutionalized '' , which featured a music video that became one of the first hardcore punk videos to receive substantial mtv airplay , and greatly expanded the band 's fan base . the song was featured in the 1984 film repo man , as well as in a 1986 episode of the tv show miami vice ( '' free verse '' , which also featured a cameo appearance of the group performing in a new wave/punk club ) and in the 2008 film iron man , where the song plays in the background as tony stark works on his car . soon after the release of their debut album in 1983 , estes left the band and was replaced by jon nelson , former manager of the venice-based band neighborhood watch . nelson played with suicidal tendencies on all the early punk shows from 1983 to 1984 contributing the music for future songs like : '' war inside my head '' , “ you got , i want '' , '' human guinea pig '' , '' you are forgiven '' and '' look up . ( the boys are back ) '' , the latter ending up on the bands compilation record welcome to venice . though nelson did not appear on any of the suicidal tendencies releases , there are some live recordings of the song '' war inside my head '' as well as others . all the music written by jon nelson was purchased by muir upon his departure from the band for a small amount of money and a flying v guitar . he is credited on the albums only as written by ( suicidal tendencies ) and in 1987 was erroneously listed as guitarist on the reissue of their debut album suicidal tendencies which was soon corrected to appropriately credit grant estes . that same year was the beginning of suicidal tendencies 's four-year recording hiatus and mike muir and bassist louiche mayorga formed the label suicidal records as well as the band los cycos . jon nelson left the group and suicidal tendencies were banned from playing l.a . shows from an incident at perkins palace ( their fans tore out ten rows of seats and promoters could not get the proper insurance to hire them ) muir was also about to try his hand at producing as well as starting the new label . los cycos was originally mike muir ( vocals ) , bob heathcote ( bass ) , anthony gallo ( guitars ) and amery smith ( drums ) . after a few rehearsals amery smith left the line up to join jon nelson in starting their own band ( the brood ) . los cycos eventually included grant estes on lead guitar and original choices bob heathcote and amery smith were replaced by louiche mayorga ( bass ) and sal troy ( drums ) . they recorded the song '' it 's not easy '' written by muir . '' welcome to venice '' was the first record to be released on suicidal records , the original masters were destroyed in a fire . in 1989 , suicidal tendencies re-recorded '' it 's not easy '' for their release controlled by hatred/feel like shit . dejavu album . the other los cycos track '' a little each day '' which never made it to the album , was re-recorded for the 1987 suicidal tendencies release join the army and again on still cyco after all these years released in 1993 . in 2000 it resurfaced on the fng compilation and a fourth time on 2008s ( split ) album lights.camera.revolution ! /still cyco after all these years . suicidal tendencies played on the track '' look up . ( the boys are back ) '' which was the introduction of guitarist rocky george and drummer rj herrera . the band found a new label in caroline records in 1986 .