maslow 's hierarchy of needs is an idea in psychology proposed by abraham maslow in his 1943 paper '' a theory of human motivation '' in psychological review . there is little scientific basis to the idea : maslow himself noted this criticism . maslow subsequently extended the idea to include his observations of humans ' innate curiosity . his theories parallel many other theories of human developmental psychology , some of which focus on describing the stages of growth in humans . he then created a classification system which reflected the universal needs of society as its base and then proceeding to more acquired emotions . maslow 's hierarchy of needs is used to study how humans intrinsically partake in behavioral motivation . maslow used the terms '' physiological '' , '' safety '' , '' belonging & nbsp ; and & nbsp ; love '' , '' social needs '' or '' esteem '' , and '' self-actualization '' to describe the pattern through which human motivations generally move . this means that in order for motivation to arise at the next stage , each stage must be satisfied within the individual themselves . additionally , this hierarchy is a main base in knowing how effort and motivation are correlated when discussing human behavior . each of these individual levels contains a certain amount of internal sensation that must be met in order for an individual to complete their hierarchy . the goal in maslow 's hierarchy is to attain the fifth level or stage : self-actualization . maslow 's idea was fully expressed in his 1954 book motivation and personality . the hierarchy remains a very popular framework in sociology research , management training and secondary and higher psychology instruction . maslow 's classification hierarchy has been revised over time . the original hierarchy states that a lower level must be completely satisfied and fulfilled before moving onto a higher pursuit . however , today scholars prefer to think of these levels as continuously overlapping each other . this means that the lower levels may take precedence back over the other levels at any point in time . maslow 's idea emerged and was informed by his work with blackfeet nation through conversations with elders and inspiration from the shape and meaning of the blackfoot tipi . however , maslow 's idea has been criticized for misrepresenting the blackfoot worldview , which instead places self-actualization as a basis for community-actualization and community-actualization as a basis for cultural perpetuity , the latter of which exists at the top of the tipi in blackfoot philosophy .