in the summer of 1996 , deputies of the 199-member belarusian parliament signed a petition to impeach lukashenko on charges of violating the constitution . shortly after that , a 1996 belarusian referendum in which four questions were offered by lukashenko and three offered by a group of parliament members . the questions ranged from social issues ( changing the independence day to 3 july ( the date of minsk offensive from nazi forces in 1944 ) , abolition of the death penalty ) to the national constitution . as a result of the referendum , the constitution that was amended by lukashenko was accepted and the one amended by the supreme council was voided . on 25 november , it was announced that 70.5 % of voters , of an 84 % turnout , had approved the amended constitution . the us and the eu , however , refused to accept the legitimacy of the referendum . after the referendum , lukashenko convened a new parliamentary assembly from those members of the parliament who were loyal to him . after between ten and twelve deputies withdrew their signature from the impeachment petition , only about forty deputies of the old parliament were left and the supreme council was dismissed by lukashenko . nevertheless , international organizations and many western countries do not recognize the current parliament given the way it was formed . u.s . relations with belarus . us department of state . 19 february 2014 . lukashenko was elected chairman of the belarusian olympic committee in 1997 . at the start of 1998 , the central bank of russia suspended trading in the belarusian ruble , which led to a collapse in the value of the currency . lukashenko responded by taking control of the national bank of the republic of belarus , sacking the entire bank leadership and blaming the west for the free fall of the currency . lukashenko blamed foreign governments for conspiring against him and , in april 1998 , expelled ambassadors from the drazdy complex near minsk and moved them to another building . the drazdy conflict caused an international outcry and resulted in a travel ban on lukashenko from the eu and the us . although the ambassadors eventually returned after the controversy died down , lukashenko stepped up his rhetorical attacks against the west . he stated that western governments were trying to undermine belarus at all levels , even sports , during the 1998 winter olympics in nagano , japan . upon the outbreak of the kosovo war in 1999 , lukashenko suggested to yugoslav president slobodan milošević that yugoslavia join the union of russia and belarus .