transcription is the first of several steps of dna based gene expression in which a particular segment of dna is copied into rna ( especially mrna ) by the enzyme rna polymerase . both dna and rna are nucleic acids , which use base pairs of nucleotides as a complementary language . during transcription , a dna sequence is read by an rna polymerase , which produces a complementary , antiparallel rna strand called a primary transcript . transcription proceeds in the following general steps : rna polymerase , together with one or more transcription factor , binds to promoter dna . rna polymerase generates a transcription bubble , which separates the two strands of the dna helix . this is done by breaking the hydrogen bonds between complementary dna nucleotides . rna polymerase adds rna nucleotides ( which are complementary to the nucleotides of one dna strand ) . rna sugar-phosphate backbone forms with assistance from rna polymerase to form an rna strand . hydrogen bonds of the rna–dna helix break , freeing the newly synthesized rna strand . if the cell has a nucleus , the rna may be further processed . this may include polyadenylation , capping , and splicing . the rna may remain in the nucleus or exit to the cytoplasm through the nuclear pore complex . the stretch of dna transcribed into an rna molecule is called a transcription unit and encodes at least one gene . if the gene encodes a protein , the transcription produces messenger rna ( mrna ) ; the mrna , in turn , serves as a template for the protein 's synthesis through translation . alternatively , the transcribed gene may encode for non-coding rna such as microrna , ribosomal rna ( rrna ) , transfer rna ( trna ) , or enzymatic rna molecules called ribozymes . eldra p . solomon , linda r . berg , diana w . martin . biology , 8th edition , international student edition . thomson brooks/cole . overall , rna helps synthesize , regulate , and process proteins ; it therefore plays a fundamental role in performing functions within a cell . in virology , the term may also be used when referring to mrna synthesis from an rna molecule ( i.e . , rna replication ) . for instance , the genome of a negative-sense single-stranded rna ( ssrna - ) virus may be template for a positive-sense single-stranded rna ( ssrna + ) . this is because the positive-sense strand contains the information needed to translate the viral proteins for viral replication afterwards . this process is catalyzed by a viral rna replicase .