a randomized controlled trial ( or randomized control trial ; rct ) is a type of scientific experiment ( e.g . a clinical trial ) or intervention study ( as opposed to observational study ) that aims to reduce certain sources of bias when testing the effectiveness of new treatments ; this is accomplished by random assignment subjects to two or more groups , treating them differently , and then comparing them with respect to a measured response . one group—the experimental group—receives the intervention being assessed , while the other—usually called the control group—receives an alternative treatment , such as a placebo or no intervention . the groups are monitored under conditions of the trial design to determine the effectiveness of the experimental intervention , and efficacy is assessed in comparison to the control . there may be more than one treatment group or more than one control group . the trial may be blinded , meaning that information which may influence the participants is withheld until after the experiment is complete . a blind can be imposed on any participant of an experiment , including subjects , researchers , technicians , data analysts , and evaluators . effective blinding may reduce or eliminate some sources of experimental bias . the randomness in the assignment of subjects to groups reduces selection bias and allocation bias , balancing both known and unknown prognostic factors , in the assignment of treatments . blinding reduces other forms of observer-expectancy effect . a well-blinded rct is often considered the gold standard for clinical trials . blinded rcts are commonly used to test the efficacy of medical interventions and may additionally provide information about adverse effects , such as drug reactions . a randomized controlled trial can provide compelling evidence that the study treatment causes an effect on human health . the terms '' rct '' and '' randomized trial '' are sometimes used synonymously , but the latter term omits mention of controls and can therefore describe studies that compare multiple treatment groups with each other in the absence of a control group . similarly , the initialism is sometimes expanded as '' randomized clinical trial '' or '' randomized comparative trial '' , leading to ambiguity in the scientific literature . not all randomized clinical trials are randomized controlled trials ( and some of them could never be , as in cases where controls would be impractical or unethical to institute ) . the term randomized controlled clinical trial is an alternative term used in clinical research ; however , rcts are also employed in other research areas , including in social science .