iannis xenakis ( also spelled as yannis xenakis , , ; 29 may 1922 – 4 february 2001 ) was a greek-french composer , music theory , architect , performance director and engineer . after 1947 , he fled greece , becoming a naturalized citizen of france . gagné , nicole v . ( 2012 ) . historical dictionary of modern and contemporary classical music . lanham : scarecrow press . p . 299 : '' xenakis settled in paris , becoming a french citizen in 1965 . '' he is considered an important post-world war ii composer whose works helped revolutionize 20th-century classical music . hoffmann : '' xenakis belonged to the pioneering generation of composers who revolutionized 20th-century music after world war ii . '' xenakis pioneered the use of mathematical models in music such as applications of set theory , stochastic processes and game theory and was also an important influence on the development of electronic and computer music . he integrated music with architecture , designing music for pre-existing spaces , and designing spaces to be integrated with specific music compositions and performances . among his most important works are metastaseis ( 1953–54 ) for orchestra , which introduced independent parts for every musician of the orchestra ; percussion works such as psappha ( 1975 ) and pléïades ( 1979 ) ; compositions that introduced spatialization by dispersing musicians among the audience , such as terretektorh ( 1966 ) ; electronic works created using xenakis 's upic system ; and the massive multimedia performances xenakis called polytopes , that were a summa of his interests and skills . among the numerous theoretical writings he authored , the book formalized music : thought and mathematics in composition ( french edition 1963 , english translation 1971 ) is regarded as one of his most important . as an architect , xenakis is primarily known for his early work under le corbusier : the sainte marie de la tourette , on which the two architects collaborated , and the philips pavilion at expo 58 , which xenakis designed by himself .