the kingdom of the kentish ; , today referred to as the kingdom of kent , was an early medieval kingdom in what is now south east england . it existed from either the fifth or the sixth century ce until it was fully absorbed into the kingdom of wessex in the late 9th century and later into kingdom of england in the early 10th century . under the preceding roman britain administration the area of kent faced repeated attacks from seafaring raiders during the fourth century ce . it is likely that germanic-speaking foederati were invited to settle in the area as mercenaries . following the end of roman administration in 410 , further linguistically germanic tribal groups moved into the area , as testified by both archaeological evidence and late anglo-saxon textual sources . the primary ethnic group to settle in the area appears to have been the jutes : they established their kingdom in east kent and may initially have been under the dominion of the kingdom of francia . it has been argued that an east saxon community initially settled in west kent , but was conquered by the expanding kingdom of east kent in the sixth century . the earliest recorded king of kent was æthelberht , who , as bretwalda , wielded significant influence over other anglo-saxon kings in the late sixth century . the christianization of the anglo-saxons began in kent during æthelberht 's reign with the arrival of the monk augustine of canterbury and his gregorian mission in 597 . kent was one of the seven kingdoms of the so-called heptarchy , but it lost its independence in the 8th century when it became a sub-kingdom of mercia . in the 9th century it became a sub-kingdom of wessex , and in the 10th century it became part of the unified kingdom of england that was created under the leadership of wessex . its name has been carried forward ever since as the county of kent . knowledge of anglo-saxon kent comes from scholarly study of late anglo-saxon texts such as the anglo-saxon chronicle and the ecclesiastical history of the english people , as well as archaeological evidence such as that left by early medieval cemeteries and settlements , and toponymical ( place-name ) evidence .