the battle of lepanto was a naval warfare that took place on 7 october 1571 when a fleet of the holy league , a coalition of catholic states arranged by pope pius v , inflicted a major defeat on the fleet of the ottoman empire in the gulf of patras . the ottoman forces were sailing westward from their naval station in lepanto ( the venetian name of ancient naupactus—greek , ottoman when they met the fleet of the holy league which was sailing east from messina , sicily . the spanish empire and the venetian republic were the main powers of the coalition , as the league was largely financed by philip ii of spain and venice was the main contributor of ships . in the history of naval warfare , lepanto marks the last major engagement in the western world to be fought almost entirely between rowing vessels , namely the galleys and galeasses which were the direct descendants of ancient trireme warships . the battle was in essence an '' infantry battle on floating platforms '' . william stevens , history of sea power ( 1920 ) , p . 83 . it was the largest naval battle in western history since classical antiquity , involving more than 400 warships . over the following decades , the increasing importance of the galleon and the line of battle tactic would displace the galley as the major warship of its era , marking the beginning of the '' age of sail '' . the victory of the holy league is of great importance in the history of europe and of the ottoman empire , marking the turning-point of ottoman military expansion into the mediterranean , although the ottoman wars in europe would continue for another century . it has long been compared to the battle of salamis , both for tactical parallels and for its crucial importance in the defense of europe against imperial expansion . see e.g . william stevens , history of sea power ( 1920 ) , p . 83 ; frederick a . de armas , cervantes , raphael and the classics ( 1998 ) , p . 87 . it was also of great symbolic importance in a period when europe was torn by its own wars of religion following the protestant reformation . pope pius v instituted the feast of our lady of victory , and philip ii of spain used the victory to strengthen his position as the '' catholic monarchs '' and defender of christendom against muslim incursion . his efforts to finance the holy league against the ottomans earned philip ii , the '' most catholic king '' , his place as '' champion of catholicism throughout europe , a role that led him to spectacular victories and equally spectacular defeats . spain 's leadership of a 'holy league ' against turkish enroachments in the mediterranean resulted in a stunning victory over the turkish fleet in the battle of lepanto in 1571 . philip 's greatest misfortunes came from his attempts to crush the revolt in the netherlands and his tortured relations with queen elizabeth of england . '' historian paul k . davis writes that , '' more than a military victory , lepanto was a moral one . for decades , the ottoman turks had terrified europe , and the victories of suleiman the magnificent caused christian europe serious concern . the defeat at lepanto further exemplified the rapid deterioration of ottoman might under selim ii , and christians rejoiced at this setback for the ottomans . the mystique of ottoman power was tarnished significantly by this battle , and christian europe was heartened . ''