in august 1861 , the prussian officer baron karl klaus von der decken accompanied by english geologist richard thornton made an attempt to climb kibo but '' got no farther than owing to the inclemency of the weather '' . in december 1862 , von der decken tried a second time together with otto kersten , reaching a height of . in august 1871 , missionary charles new became the '' first european to reach the equatorial snows '' on kilimanjaro at an elevation of slightly more than . in june 1887 , the hungarian count sámuel teleki and the austrian lieutenant ludwig von höhnel made an attempt to climb the mountain . approaching from the saddle between mawenzi and kibo , höhnel stopped at , but teleki continued until he reached the snow at . later in 1887 , the german geology professor hans meyer reached the lower edge of the ice cap on kibo , where he was forced to turn back because he lacked the equipment needed to progress across the ice . the following year , meyer planned another attempt with oscar baumann , a cartographer , but the mission was aborted after the pair were held hostage and ransomed during the abushiri revolt . in the autumn of 1888 , the american naturalist dr . abbott and the german explorer otto ehrenfried ehlers approached the summit from the northwest . while abbott turned back earlier , ehlers at first claimed to have reached the summit rim , but after severe criticism of the claim , withdrew it . in 1889 , meyer returned to kilimanjaro with the austrian mountaineer ludwig purtscheller for a third attempt . this attempt was based on the establishment of several campsites with food supplies so that multiple attempts at the top could be made without having to descend too far . meyer and purtscheller pushed to near the crater rim on 3 october but turned back exhausted from hacking footsteps in the icy slope . three days later , they reached the highest summit , on the southern rim of the crater . they were the first to confirm that kibo has a crater . after descending to the saddle between kibo and mawenzi , meyer and purtscheller attempted to climb the more technically challenging mawenzi but could only reach the top of klute peak , a subsidiary peak , before retreating due to illness . on 18 october , they reascended kibo to enter and study the crater , cresting the rim at hans meyers notch . in total , meyer and purtscheller spent 16 days above during their expedition . they were accompanied in their high camps by mwini amani of pangani , who cooked and supplied the sites with water and firewood . the first ascent of the highest summit of mawenzi was made on 29 july 1912 , by the german climbers eduard hans oehler and fritz klute , who named it hans meyer peak . oehler and klute went on to make the third-ever ascent of kibo , via the drygalski glacier , and descended via the western breach . in 1989 , the organizing committee of the 100-year celebration of the first ascent decided to award posthumous certificates to the african porter-guides who had accompanied meyer and purtscheller . one person in pictures or documents of the 1889 expedition was thought to match a living inhabitant of marangu , yohani kinyala lauwo . lauwo did not know his own age , nor remember meyer or purtscheller . he did recall joining a kilimanjaro expedition involving a dutch doctor who lived near the mountain , and that he did not wear shoes during the climb . lauwo claimed that he had climbed the mountain three times before the beginning of world war i . the committee concluded that he had been a member of meyer 's team and therefore must have been born around 1871 . lauwo died on 10 may 1996 , 107 years after the first ascent . it is sometimes suggested that he was a co-first-ascendant of kilimanjaro .