the free zone , “ freezone ” , or more recently identified as independent scientology , comprises a variety of non-affiliated independent groups and individuals who practice scientology beliefs and techniques independently of the church of scientology ( cos ) . '' one of the first steps toward open warfare was the emergence , in about 1990 , of a group that wanted to separate the church and its scriptures . calling itself the free zone , this group consists of people who have left the church but still want to practice its teachings - use the tech , as free zoners say . ex scientologist homer smith is one of these ( ex meaning '' former church adherent , '' not '' former '' scientologist , says smith ) . wanting to encourage serious discussion of the tech away from the noisy brawl next door in alt.religion.scientology , smith set up a second newsgroup , alt.clearing.technology , for this purpose . '' such practitioners range from those who closely adhere to the original teachings of scientology 's founder , l . ron hubbard , to those who have adapted their practices so far that they are almost unrecognizable as scientology . the term free zone was originally only used by a single organization , but the term is now commonly applied to all non-cos scientologists , although many dispute the application of the term to themselves . the international freezone association , the group whose name became adopted as a generic term for independent scientology , was not the first independent scientologist group ; the california association of dianetic auditors , the oldest breakaway group still in existence , additional convenience link at claims a founding date of december 1950 , predating the church of scientology itself . a november 2004 press release published by the international freezone association cited a command written by hubbard : '' . before you go , whisper this to your sons and their sons : 'the work was free . keep it so . ' '' skeptic magazine described the free zone as : '' a group founded by ex-scientologists to promote l . ron hubbard 's ideas independent of the church of scientology . '' a miami herald article wrote that ex-scientologists joined the free zone because they felt that church of scientology leadership had '' strayed from hubbard 's original teachings . ''