the oldest known examples of architecture in nepal are stupas of early buddhist constructions in and around kapilvastu in south-western nepal , and those constructed by ashoka in the kathmandu valley 250 bc . the characteristic architecture associated exclusively with nepal was developed and refined by newa artisans of the kathmandu valley starting no later than the lichchhavi period . a tang dynasty chinese travel book , probably based on records from 650 ad , describes contemporary nepali architecture , predominantly built with wood , as rich in artistry , as well as wood and metal sculpture . it describes a magnificent seven-storied pagoda in the middle of a palace , with copper-tiled roofs , its balustrade , grills , columns and beams set about with fine and precious stones , and four golden sculptures of makaras in the four corners of the base spouting water from their mouths like a fountain , supplied by copper pipes connected to the runnels at the top of the tower . later chinese chronicles describe nepal 's king 's palace as an immense structure with many roofs , suggesting that chinese were not yet familiar with the pagoda architecture , which has now become one of the chief characteristic of chinese architecture . a typical pagoda temple is built with wood , every piece of it finely carved with geometrical patterns or images of gods , goddesses , mythical beings and beasts . the roofs usually tiled with clay , and sometimes gold plated , diminish in proportion successively until the topmost roof is reached which is itself ensigned by a golden finial . the base is usually composed of rectangular terraces of finely carved stone ; the entrance is usually guarded by stone sculptures of conventional figures . bronze and copper craftsmanship observable in the sculpture of deities and beasts , decorations of doors and windows and the finials of buildings , as well as items of every day use is found to be of equal splendour . the most well-developed of nepali painting traditions is the thanka or paubha painting tradition of tibetan buddhism , practised in nepal by the buddhist monks and newar artisans . changu narayan temple , built 4th century ad has probably the finest of nepali woodcraft ; the kathmandu , patan and bhaktapur durbar squares are the culmination of nepali art and architecture , showcasing nepali wood , metal and stone craftsmanship refined over two millennia . the newar window , that allow a one-way view of the outside world , is an example of unique nepali woodcraft , found in building structures , domestic and public alike , ancient and modern . many cultures paint the walls of their homes with regular patterns , figures of gods and beasts and religious symbols ; others paint their walls plain , often with clay or chernozem contrasted with yellow soil or limestone . the roofs of religious as well as domestic structures project considerably , presumably to provide protection from the sun and the rain . the timber of domestic structures are finely carved as with their religious counterparts .