mink are dark-colored , semiaquatic , carnivorous mammals of the genus neovison and mustela , and part of the family mustelidae , which also includes weasels , otters and ferrets . there are two extant species referred to as '' mink '' : the american mink and the european mink . the extinct sea mink is related to the american mink but was much larger . the american mink is larger and more adaptable than the european mink but , due to variations in size , an individual mink usually can not be determined as european or american with certainty without looking at the skeleton . however , all european mink have a large white patch on their upper lip , whereas only some american mink have this marking . therefore , any mink without the patch is certainly of the american species . taxonomically , both american and european mink were placed in the same genus mustela but the american mink has since been reclassified as belonging to its own genus , neovison . the mink fur has been highly prized for use in clothing . their treatment on fur farms has been a focus of animal rights and animal welfare activism . american mink have established populations in europe ( including great britain ) and south america , after being released from mink farms by animal rights activists , or otherwise escaping from captivity . in the uk , under the wildlife & countryside act 1981 , it is illegal to release mink into the wild . in some countries , any live mink caught in traps must be humanely killed . american mink are believed by some to have contributed to the decline of the less hardy european mink through competition ( though not through hybridization—native european mink are in fact more closely related to polecats than to north american mink ) . trapping is used to control or eliminate introduced american mink populations . haworth , jenny ( 3 february 2009 ) '' national cull may exterminate uk mink '' . edinburgh . the scotsman . mink oil is used in some medical products and cosmetics , as well as to treat , preserve , and waterproof leather .