the civil service is a collective term for a sector of government composed mainly of career civil servants hired on professional merit rather than appointed or elected , whose institutional tenure typically survives transitions of political leadership . a civil servant is a person employed in the public sector by a government department or agency or public sector undertakings . civil servants work for central government and state governments , & answer to the government , not a political party . the extent of civil servants of a state as part of the '' civil service '' varies from country to country . in the united kingdom , for instance , only crown ( national government ) employees are referred to as civil servants whereas employees of local authorities ( counties , cities and similar administrations ) are generally referred to as '' local government civil service officers '' who , are civil servants and public servants . a civil servant is a public servant but a public servant is not necessarily civil servant . the study of the civil service is a part of the field of public service . staff members in '' non-departmental public bodies '' ( sometimes called '' quango '' ) may also be classed as civil servants for the purpose of statistics and possibly for their terms and conditions . collectively a state 's civil servants form its civil service or public service . an international civil servant or international staff member is a civilian employee who is employed by an intergovernmental organization . these international civil servants do not resort under any national legislation ( from which they have immunity of jurisdiction ) but are governed by internal staff regulations . all disputes related to international civil service are brought before special tribunals created by these international organizations such as , for instance , the administrative tribunal of the ilo . specific referral can be made to the international civil service commission ( icsc ) of the united nations , an independent expert body established by the united nations general assembly . its mandate is to regulate and coordinate the conditions of service of staff in the united nations common system , while promoting and maintaining high standards in the international civil service .