chivalry & sorcery is a fantasy role-playing game that was first published in 1977 by fantasy games unlimited . created by edward e . simbalist and wilf k . backhaus in 1977 , chivalry & sorcery ( c & s ) was an early competitor to dungeons & dragons ( d & d ) . historically , the two designers of the game were dissatisfied with the lack of realism in d & d and created a gaming system derived from it , which they named chevalier . they intended to present it to gary gygax at gen con in 1977 , but changed their minds once at the con , where they met scott bizar who wrote out a letter of intent . after some final changes to get rid of the last remnants of d & d ( e.g . the game contained a table of '' saving-throws '' similar to d & d ) , simbalist and backhaus published the first edition of their game - now renamed chivalry & sorcery - shortly after the release of the first edition advanced d & d monster manual . according to michael tresca , chivalry & sorcery '' embraced a realistic approach to medieval france in the 12th century , complete with feudalism and the catholic church . '' and '' was most noteworthy for creating the term '' game master . '' ( actually though , that term had already previously been used in tunnels & trolls and bunnies & burrows . ) '' it was one of the first games to place the setting at utmost importance over the mechanics of the game . '' more focused on medieval chivalry than fantasy , chivalry & sorcery had from its first version a sophisticated and complex set of rules . the game has been published four times to improve its presentation and to modernize its game mechanics . c & s was the first to introduce new concepts like levels for monsters . players could adventure in a variety of locations instead of being confined to a dark underground dungeon . the action taking place outside the framework of an adventure became very important , especially for magicians , who had to spend many days to learn their spells and enchant their materials .