postpartum depression ( ppd ) , also called postnatal depression , is a type of mood disorder associated with childbirth , which can affect both sexes . symptoms may include extreme sadness , low energy , anxiety , crying episodes , irritability , and changes in sleeping or eating patterns . onset is typically between one week and one month following childbirth . ppd can also negatively affect the newborn child . while the exact cause of ppd is unclear , the cause is believed to be a combination of physical , emotional , genetic , and social factors . these may include factors such as hormonal changes and sleep deprivation . risk factors include prior episodes of postpartum depression , bipolar disorder , a family history of depression , psychological stress , complications of childbirth , lack of support , or a drug use disorder . diagnosis is based on a person 's symptoms . while most women experience a brief period of worry or unhappiness after delivery , postpartum depression should be suspected when symptoms are severe and last over two weeks . among those at risk , providing psychosocial support may be protective in preventing ppd . this may include community support such as food , household chores , mother care , and companionship . treatment for ppd may include counseling or medications . types of counseling that have been found to be effective include interpersonal psychotherapy ( ipt ) , cognitive behavioral therapy ( cbt ) , and psychodynamic therapy . tentative evidence supports the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( ssris ) . postpartum depression affects roughly 15 % of women after childbirth . moreover , this mood disorder is estimated to affect 1 % to 26 % of new fathers . postpartum psychosis , a more severe form of postpartum mood disorder , occurs in about 1 to 2 per 1,000 women following childbirth . postpartum psychosis is one of the leading causes of the infanticide , which occurs in about 8 per 100,000 births in the united states .