footnotes haarmann was acquitted of three murders at his trial : those of adolf hennies , hermann wolf , and hermann bock . in each instance , strong circumstantial evidence existed attesting to his guilt . monsters of weimar pp . 99-100 in the case of hermann wolf , police established that prior to the youth 's disappearance , he had informed his father he had conversed with a detective at hanover station . haarmann is known to have given many of wolf 's clothes to his landlady in the days immediately following his 44th birthday ( shortly after wolf was reported missing ) . moreover , the youth 's distinctive belt buckle was found at haarmann 's rote reihe address . haarmann only chose to deny this murder midway through his trial , following heated threats made against him by the father of the murdered youth . monsters of weimar pp . 94-95 haarmann was acquitted of the murder of adolf hennies due to conflicting testimony regarding the circumstances as to whether he or grans actually murdered the youth . although haarmann admitted at his trial to having dismembered hennies 's body , he claimed to have returned to his apartment and '' found a dead body lying there , '' to which , he claimed , grans simply replied , '' one of yours . '' grans would deny this claim , and would state that he had bought hennies 's distinctive coat from haarmann for eight marks , after having been warned the coat was stolen . due to this conflicting testimony , and the lack of an actual witness to the murder , neither haarmann nor grans were convicted of hennies 's murder . monsters of weimar pp . 99-100 in the case of hermann bock , several friends of his testified at haarmann 's trial that , prior to haarmann 's arrest , they were actively dissuaded from filing a missing person report upon the youth with police ; these witnesses testified that haarmann was insistent on filing the report himself ( he had never done so ) . other witnesses testified to having acquired various personal possessions belonging to the youth from haarmann . in addition , a tailor testified at haarmann 's trial to having been asked by haarmann to alter the suit . haarmann repeatedly contradicted himself regarding his claims as to how he acquired the youth 's possessions . it is likely that haarmann chose to deny this murder due to evidence suggesting the murder had been premeditated , as opposed to being committed in the throes of passion . he had known the youth for several years prior to his murder , and bock was known to be heterosexual . due to his denial of having committed this particular murder , haarmann was acquitted . monsters of weimar p . 111