george powers cockcroft ( november 15 , 1932 – november 6 , 2020 ) , widely known by the pen name luke rhinehart , was an american novelist , screenwriter , and nonfiction writer , with at least ten books to his name . he is best known for his 1971 novel the dice man , the story of a psychiatrist who experiments with making life decisions based on the roll of a die , including , near the novel 's onset , the rape of his best friend 's wife . cockcroft has described the origin of the idea for this work variously , for a more complete discussion , see the wikipedia article , the dice man , and references therein . for an account that describes the origin of the idea in the years between cockcroft 's teens and early twenties in a self-help effort to move him away from shyness and uptightness through risk-taking , in areas such as '' what to read , where to go , how to react to people , '' see adams , the guardian , 27 august 2000 , op . cit . for an account that describes the origin of the idea in cockcroft 's college years , in as a way to decide what he and his friends would do together socially , or to decide between slightly mischieveous dates , see carrère , the guardian , 7 november 2019 , op . cit . for an account that describes the origin of the idea in cockcroft at the age of 16 years , likewise in an effort to move him away , first , from procrastination , and later , from shyness , see gold , the guardian , 4 march 2017 , op . cit . however , at the time of the publication of this work , '' it was not clear whether the book was fiction or autobiography '' , all the more because its protagonist and author were eponymous , both were described as having the same profession ( psychiatry ) , and elements of the described lives of both ( e.g . , places of residence , date of birth ) were also in common ; hence , curiosity over its authorship have persisted since its publication . emmanuel carrère , writing for the guardian , presented a long-form expose on cockcroft and the relationship between author and legend in 2019 , and in following others , established the author cockcroft as a life-long english professor living '' in an old farmhouse with a yard that slopes down to a duck pond '' , a husband of fifty-years , father of three , and a caregiver to a special needs child . the dice man was critically well received . it quickly became , and remains thought of as a cult classic . it initially sold poorly in the united states , but well in europe , particularly england , sweden , denmark , and spain . writing in 2017 for the guardian , tanya gold noted that '' over the course of 45 years '' it was still in print , had become famous , had devoted fans , and had '' sold more than 2m copies in multiple languages '' ( e.g . , as many as 27 languages and 60 countries have been claimed ) . in 1995 , the bbc called it '' one of the fifty most influential books of the last half of the twentieth century , '' and in 1999 , after one of their reporters experimented , controversially , with dicing , loaded magazine named it '' novel of the century '' . in 2013 , alex clark of the telegraph chose it as one of the fifty greatest cult books of the last hundred years . cockcroft continued themes—both comical and philosophical—introduced in the dice man—in two later novels , adventures of wim ( 1986 ) and the search for the dice man ( 1993 ) , as well as in a companion title , the book of the die ( 2000 ) , none of which achieved the commercial success of the dice man . first published in 1971 , the dice man was twice spoken of in the early 2000s as enjoying a renaissance , though a scholar writing on the subject has indicated no formal evidence for such .