sir henry joseph wood ( 3 march 186919 august 1944 ) was an english conductor best known for his association with london 's annual series of promenade concerts , known as the proms . he conducted them for nearly half a century , introducing hundreds of new works to british audiences . after his death , the concerts were officially renamed in his honour as the '' henry wood promenade concerts '' , although they continued to be generally referred to as '' the proms '' . born in modest circumstances to parents who encouraged his musical talent , wood started his career as an organist . during his studies at the royal academy of music , he came under the influence of the voice teacher manuel garcia and became his accompanist . after similar work for richard d'oyly carte 's opera companies on the works of arthur sullivan and others , wood became the conductor of a small operatic touring company . he was soon engaged by the larger carl rosa opera company . one notable event in his operatic career was conducting the british premiere of tchaikovsky 's eugene onegin in 1892 . from the mid-1890s until his death , wood focused on concert conducting . he was engaged by the impresario robert newman to conduct a series of promenade concerts at the queen 's hall , offering a mixture of classical and popular music at low prices . the series was successful , and wood conducted annual promenade series until his death in 1944 . by the 1920s , wood had steered the repertoire entirely to classical music . when the queen 's hall was destroyed by bombing in 1941 , the proms moved to the royal albert hall . wood declined the chief conductorships of the new york philharmonic and boston symphony orchestras , believing it his duty to serve music in the united kingdom . in addition to the proms , he conducted concerts and festivals throughout the country and also trained the student orchestra at the royal academy of music . he had an enormous influence on the musical life of britain over his long career : he and newman greatly improved access to classical music , and wood raised the standard of orchestral playing and nurtured the taste of the public , presenting a vast repertoire of music spanning four centuries .