the new romantic movement was a pop culture movement that originated in the united kingdom in the late 1970s . the movement emerged from the nightclub scene in london and birmingham at venues such as billy 's and the blitz . the new romantic movement was characterised by flamboyant , eccentric fashion inspired by fashion boutiques such as kahn and bell in birmingham and px in london . early adherents of the movement were often referred to by the press by such names as blitz kids , new dandy and romantic rebels . influenced by david bowie , marc bolan and roxy music , the new romantics developed fashions inspired by the glam rock era coupled with the early romanticism of the late 18th and early 19th century ( from which the movement took its name ) . the term '' new romantic '' is known to have been coined by musician , producer , manager and innovator richard james burgess . in response to a question about being credited with coining the term new romantic in an interview with the electricity club , burgess said : '' initially i was using three terms - futurist , electronic dance music ( the landscape singles have edm printed on them ) and new romantic . '' in an interview with nz musician , burgess was asked how he came to be credited with originating the term new romantic , and replied : '' i always had a kind of marketing sensibility and i felt that it was important for a movement to have a name . if you look at the first single off the tearooms album – '' european man '' – it has the catalogue number edm1 on the label , and the back cover of the single says 'electronic dance music… edm ; computer programmed to perfection for your listening pleasure… ' that was many years before the term edm began being commonly used . the name futurist was floating around as well but never really stuck . 'new romantic ' did n't really fit landscape very well but it did fit the blitz scene and spandau ballet , although most of the groups tried to distance themselves from it . '' though it was a fashion movement , several british music acts in the late 1970s and early 1980s adopted the style and became known to epitomise it within the press , including steve strange of visage , duran duran , spandau ballet , a flock of seagulls , classix nouveaux and boy george ( of culture club ) . ultravox were also often identified as new romantics by the press , although they did not exhibit the same visual styles of the movement , despite their link to the band visage . japan and adam and the ants were also labelled as new romantic artists by the press , although both repudiated this and neither had any direct connection to the original scene . a number of these bands adopted synthesizers and helped to develop synth-pop in the early 1980s , which , combined with the distinctive new romantic visuals , helped them first to national success in the uk , and then , via mtv , play a major part in the second british invasion of the u.s . charts . by the end of 1981 , the original movement had largely dissipated . although some of the artists associated with the scene continued their careers , they had largely abandoned the aesthetics of the movement . there were attempts to revive the movement from the 1990s , including the short-lived romo scene .