the colony was perpetually short of administrative staff and officials , who numbered between 700 and 1,500 during the period . leopold pledged to suppress the east african slave trade ; promote humanitarian policies ; guarantee free trade within the colony ; impose no import duties for twenty years ; and encourage philanthropic and scientific enterprises . beginning in the mid-1880s , leopold first decreed that the state asserted rights of proprietorship over all vacant lands throughout the congo territory . in three successive decrees , leopold promised the rights of the congolese in their land to native villages and farms , essentially making nearly all of the cfs terres domainales ( state-owned land ) . leopold further decreed that merchants should limit their commercial operations in rubber trade with the natives . additionally , the colonial administration liberated thousands of slaves . david northrup . beyond the bend in the river . african labor in eastern zaïre , 1865–1940 ( athens : ohio university press , 1988 ) . four main problems presented themselves over the next few years . leopold ii ran up huge debts to finance his colonial endeavor and risked losing his colony to belgium . much of the free state was unmapped jungle , which offered little fiscal and commercial return . cecil rhodes , prime minister of the cape colony ( part of modern south africa ) , was expanding his british south africa company 's charter lands from the south and threatened to occupy katanga ( southern congo ) by exploiting the '' principle of effectivity '' loophole in the berlin treaty . in this he was supported by harry johnston , the british central africa , who was london 's representative in the region . joseph moloney : with captain stairs to katanga . sampson low , marston & co , london ( 1893 ) , p11 . the congolese interior was ruled by arab zanzibari slavers and sultans , powerful kings and warlords who had to be coerced or defeated by use of force . for example , the slaving gangs of zanzibar trader tippu tip had a strong presence in the eastern part of the territory in the modern-day maniema , tanganika and ituri regions . they were linked to the swahili coast via uganda and tanzania and had established independent slave states .