religious nationalism is the relationship of nationalism to a particular religion belief , dogma , or affiliation . this relationship can be broken down into two aspects : the politicization of religion and the influence of religion on politics . in the former aspect , a shared religion can be seen to contribute to a sense of national unity , a common bond among the citizens of the nation . another political aspect of religion is the support of a national identity , similar to a shared ethnicity , language , or culture . the influence of religion on politics is more ideology , where current interpretations of religious ideas inspire political activism and action ; for example , laws are passed to foster stricter religious adherence . juergensmeyer , mark . '' the worldwide rise of religious nationalism '' , journal of international affairs , summer 1996 , 50 , 1 . ideologically-driven religious nationalism may not necessarily be targeted against other religions per se , but can be articulated in response to modernity and , in particular , secular nationalism . indeed , religious nationalism may articulate itself as the binary of secular nationalism . nation-states whose borders are relatively recent or that have experienced colonialism may be more prone to religious nationalism , which may stand as a more authentic or '' traditional '' rendering of identity . thus , there was a global rise of religious nationalism in the wake of the end of the cold war , but also as postcolonial politics ( facing considerable developmental challenges , but also dealing with the reality of colonially-defined , and therefore somewhat artificial , borders ) became challenged . in such a scenario , appealing to a national sense of islamic identity , as in the cases of pakistan ( see two-nation theory ) and indonesia , may serve to override regional tensions . the danger is that when the state derives political legitimacy from adherence to religious doctrines , this may leave an opening to overtly religious elements , institutions , and leaders , making the appeals to religion more 'authentic ' by bringing more explicitly theological interpretations to political life . thus , appeals to religion as a marker of ethnicity creates an opening for more strident and ideological interpretations of religious nationalism . many ethnic and cultural nationalisms include religious aspects , but as a marker of group identity , rather than the intrinsic motivation for nationalist claims .