hms canopus was a pre-dreadnought battleship of the british royal navy and the lead ship of the . intended for service in asia , canopus and her sister ships were smaller and faster than the preceding s , but retained the same battery of four guns . she also carried thinner armour , but incorporated new krupp steel , which was more effective than the harvey armour used in the majestics . canopus was laid down in january 1897 , launched in october that year , and commissioned into the fleet in december 1899 . canopus served in the mediterranean fleet upon commissioning until 1903 , when she was decommissioned for refitting . in 1905 , she was sent to east asia , but the renewal of the anglo-japanese alliance that year rendered her presence in asian waters unnecessary . she instead returned to britain and served with several fleet commands in british waters , including the atlantic fleet , the channel fleet , and finally the home fleet . another short deployment to the mediterranean followed in 1908–1909 . upon returning to britain , she was placed in reserve . at the beginning of the first world war in august 1914 , she was mobilised for service in the south america station , where she patrolled for german commerce raiders . she was involved in the search for the german east asia squadron of vice admiral maximilian von spee . too slow to follow admiral sir christopher cradock 's cruisers , she missed the battle of coronel in november 1914 , where cradock was defeated . moored at port stanley as a defensive battery , she fired the first shots of the battle of the falklands in december , which led spee to break off the attack before being chased down and destroyed by admiral doveton sturdee 's battlecruisers . canopus was transferred to the mediterranean in early 1915 for the dardanelles campaign . she participated in major attacks on the ottoman coastal fortifications defending the dardanelles in march 1915 , but the british and french fleets proved incapable of forcing the straits . after the gallipoli campaign ended with the withdrawal of allied forces in january 1916 , canopus patrolled the eastern mediterranean , but saw no further action . she was removed from service in april 1916 and was converted into a barracks ship in early 1918 . after the war , the ship was broken up in 1920 .