athlone castle is the geographical and historical centre of athlone . throughout its early history , the ford of athlone was strategically important , as south of athlone the shannon is impassable until clonmacnoise , where the esker riada meets the shannon , while to the north it flows into lough ree . in 1001 brian boru sailed his army up river from kincora and through lough derg to attend a gathering in athlone . the following year , brian met the high king of ireland máel sechnaill mac domnaill at athlone , intending to engage him in battle for the high kingship – only to have máel sechnaill , abandoned by his kinsmen of the northern uí néill , submit to brian without a fight . a bridge was built across the river in the 12th century , approximately south of the current structure . to protect the bridge , a fort was constructed on the river 's west bank , within athlone , by turloch mór ó conor . on a number of occasions both the fort and bridge were subject to attacks , and towards the end of the 12th century the anglo-normans constructed a motte-and-bailey fortification there . this earthen fort was followed by a stone structure built in 1210 by justiciar john de gray . the 12-sided donjon , or tower , dates from this time ; however , the rest of the original castle was largely destroyed during the siege of athlone and subsequently rebuilt and enlarged . throughout the wars that wracked ireland in the 17th century , athlone contained the vital , main bridge over the river shannon into connacht . during the irish confederate wars ( 1641–53 ) , the town was held by irish confederate troops until it was taken by charles coote in late 1650 , who attacked the town from the west , having crossed into connacht at sligo . forty years later , during the pan-european war of the grand alliance ( 1688–97 ) , the town was again of key strategic importance . this time around , athlone was one of the jacobite strongholds that defended the river-crossings into the confederate-held connacht following the battle of the boyne on 1 july 1690 . that same year , colonel richard grace 's jacobite forces in athlone repelled an attack by 10,000 men led by commander douglas . in the following year 's campaign , the siege of athlone saw a further assault by a larger allied force , during which the invading troops of king william and queen mary eventually overran the entire city . the defenders were forced to flee further west , toward the river suck , at such speed that eyewitness accounts record that they '' flung their cannons into the morass '' as they fled . the most recently discovered account of the siege of athlone , written after the attack , on 5 july 1691 , was found in 2004 in an archive in the netherlands . the account was penned by the victorious commanding officer from the republic of the seven united netherlands , general lieutenant godard van reede , in letters written to his family in mainland europe . in the account , the commanding allied officer reported that half of athlone 's defenders retreated westward , towards the rest of their army , leaving almost 2,000 dead within the city walls and more than 100 taken prisoner , including dozens of officers . in the 1970s it was proposed in the republican éire nua programme to make athlone the capital of a federal united ireland . fagan jack , '' sinn fein ( kevin street ) plan for new ireland '' , irish times , 29 june 1972 ( pp . 1 , 7 ) .