digestion is the breakdown of large insoluble food molecules into small water-soluble food molecules so that they can be absorbed into the watery blood plasma . in certain organisms , these smaller substances are absorbed through the small intestine into the blood stream . digestion is a form of catabolism that is often divided into two processes based on how food is broken down : mechanical and chemical digestion . the term mechanical digestion refers to the physical breakdown of large pieces of food into smaller pieces which can subsequently be accessed by digestive enzymes . in chemical digestion , enzymes break down food into the small molecules the body can use . in the human digestive system , food enters the mouth and mechanical digestion of the food starts by the action of mastication ( chewing ) , a form of mechanical digestion , and the wetting contact of saliva . saliva , a liquid secreted by the salivary glands , contains salivary amylase , an enzyme which starts the digestion of starch in the food ; the saliva also contains mucus , which lubricates the food , and hydrogencarbonate , which provides the ideal conditions of ph ( alkaline ) for amylase to work . after undergoing mastication and starch digestion , the food will be in the form of a small , round slurry mass called a bolus . it will then travel down the esophagus and into the stomach by the action of peristalsis . gastric juice in the stomach starts proteolysis . gastric juice mainly contains hydrochloric acid and pepsin . in infants and toddlers gastric juice also contains rennin . as the first two chemicals may damage the stomach wall , mucus is secreted by the stomach , providing a slimy layer that acts as a shield against the damaging effects of the chemicals . at the same time protein digestion is occurring , mechanical mixing occurs by peristalsis , which is waves of muscular contractions that move along the stomach wall . this allows the mass of food to further mix with the digestive enzymes . studies suggest that increasing the number of chews per bite increases relevant gut hormones and may decrease self-reported hunger and food intake . after some time ( typically 1–2 hours in humans , 4–6 hours in dogs , 3–4 hours in house cats ) , the resulting thick liquid is called chyme . when the pylorus opens , chyme enters the duodenum where it mixes with digestive enzymes from the pancreas and bile juice from the liver and then passes through the small intestine , in which digestion continues . when the chyme is fully digested , it is absorbed into the blood . 95 % of nutrient absorption occurs in the small intestine . water and minerals are reabsorbed back into the blood in the colon ( large intestine ) where the ph is slightly acidic about 5.6 ~ 6.9 . some vitamins , such as biotin and vitamin k ( k 2 mk7 ) produced by bacteria in the colon are also absorbed into the blood in the colon . waste material is eliminated from the rectum during defecation .