a federation ( also known as a federal state ) is a political entity characterized by a union of partially federated state under a central federal government ( federalism ) . in a federation , the self-governing status of the component states , as well as the division of power between them and the central government , is typically constitutionally entrenched and may not be altered by a unilateral decision of either party , the states or the federal political body . alternatively , a federation is a form of government in which sovereign power is formally divided between a central authority and a number of constituent regions so that each region retains some degree of control over its internal affairs . it is often argued that federal states where the central government has overriding powers , are not truly federal states . for example , such overriding powers may include : the constitutional authority to suspend a constituent state 's government by invoking gross mismanagement or civil unrest , or to adopt national legislation that overrides or infringe on the constituent states ' powers by invoking the central government 's constitutional authority to ensure '' peace and good government '' or to implement obligations contracted under an international treaty . the governmental or constitutional structure found in a federation is considered to be federalist , or to be an example of federalism . it can be considered the opposite of another system , the unitary state . france , for example , has been unitary for multiple centuries . austria and its länder was a unitary state with administrative divisions that became federated through the implementation of the austrian constitution following the 1918 collapse of austria-hungary . germany , with its 16 states of germany , is an example of a federation . federations are often ethnic group and cover a large area of territory ( such as russia , the united states , canada , india , or brazil ) , but neither is necessarily the case ( such as saint kitts and nevis or the federated states of micronesia ) . several ancient chiefdoms and kingdoms , such as the 4th-century bce league of corinth , noricum in central europe , and the iroquois in pre-columbian north america , could be described as federations or confederations . the old swiss confederacy was an early example of formal non-unitary statehood . several colonies and dominions in the new world consisted of autonomous provinces , transformed to federal states upon independence such as the united states , and various countries in latin america ( see spanish american wars of independence ) . some of the new world federations failed ; the federal republic of central america broke up into independent states less than 20 years after its founding . others , such as argentina and mexico , have shifted between federal , confederal , and unitary systems , before settling into federalism . brazil became a federation only after the fall of the monarchy , and venezuela became a federation after the federal war . australia and canada are also federations . germany is another nation-state that has switched between confederal , federal and unitary rules , since the german confederation was founded in 1815 . the north german confederation , the succeeding german empire and the weimar republic were federations . founded in 1922 , the soviet union was formally a federation of soviet republics , autonomous republics and other federal subjects , though in practice highly centralized under the government of the soviet union . the russia has inherited a similar system . nigeria , pakistan , india and malaysia ( then federation of malaya ) became federations on or shortly before becoming independent from the british empire . in some recent cases , federations have been instituted as a measure to handle ethnic conflict within a state , such as bosnia and herzegovina , and iraq since 2005 . with the united states constitution having become effective on 4 march 1789 , the united states is the oldest surviving federation . on the other end of the timeline is nepal , which became the newest federation after its constitution went into effect on 20 september 2015 .