in april 2015 , the company confirmed that it was working on vegan options , after hearing consumers ' feedback , led by a petition and farm organization . in early february 2016 , the company announced a new all-vegan line with four flavors . two of these are versions of existing flavors – '' chunky monkey '' and '' chocolate fudge brownie '' – and two are all-new vegan-only flavors : '' coffee caramel fudge '' and '' peanut butter & cookies '' . in february 2017 , three new non-dairy flavors were added : caramel almond brittle , cherry garcia , and coconut seven layer bar . in january 2018 , the company added two new non-dairy flavors to its growing line of vegan options . peanut butter half baked features chocolate and peanut butter with fudge brownies and pieces of peanut butter cookie dough , while cinnamon buns is made with cinnamon-spiced ice cream and features cinnamon bun dough and a cinnamon streusel swirl . ben and jerry 's non-dairy line also features flavors such as pb & cookies , chocolate fudge brownie , and caramel coffee fudge . among their newest non-dairy flavors are the following : chocolate caramel cluster , chocolate chip cookie dough , and chocolate salted n ' swirled . ben & jerry 's also just released new snack-able '' cookie dough chunks '' that have a vegan option for the non-dairy connoisseur . they continue to take new non-dairy flavor suggestions on their website . in october 2018 , ben and jerry 's launched a campaign for a limited-edition ice cream flavor that also held a political message focusing on resisting the us 's current governmental administration under trump . the campaign debuted the new flavor , ‘ pecan resist ’ and included new packaging that advertised their messages . the company donated 25,000 to four organizations that supported their interests towards progress with societal issues including inclusivity , justice for people of color , women , refugees , the lgbtq community , and issues of climate change . thumb free cone day is an annual event held between late march and early may , in which ben & jerry 's scoop shops give out free ice cream cups and cones . free cone day was first held on saturday , may 5 , 1979 , by ben and jerry as a customer and staff appreciation event for the first anniversary of their store 's opening . every year over one million cones are given away , prompting the company 's ad slogan '' be one in a million . '' charitable organizations are often present at the stores each year and enjoy a significant amount of fundraising success . often , local celebrities show up at various stores , promoting the day and the charities there . sometimes the event is scheduled to coincide with earth day and sometimes volunteers are on hand with clipboards and voter registration forms to help those who would like to register to vote ( in those countries where that is necessary ) .