corrosion is a erosion that converts a refined metal into a more chemically stable form such as oxide , hydroxide , or sulfide . it is the gradual destruction of materials ( usually a metal ) by chemical and/or electrochemical reaction with their environment . corrosion engineering is the field dedicated to controlling and preventing corrosion . in the most common use of the word , this means electrochemical oxidation of metal in reaction with an oxidant such as oxygen or sulfates . rusting , the formation of iron oxides , is a well-known example of electrochemical corrosion . this type of damage typically produces oxide ( s ) or salt ( s ) of the original metal and results in a distinctive orange colouration . corrosion can also occur in materials other than metals , such as ceramics or polymers , although in this context , the term '' degradation '' is more common . corrosion degrades the useful properties of materials and structures including strength , appearance and permeability to liquids and gases . many structural alloys corrode merely from exposure to moisture in air , but the process can be strongly affected by exposure to certain substances . corrosion can be concentrated locally to form a pit or crack , or it can extend across a wide area more or less uniformly corroding the surface . because corrosion is a diffusion-controlled process , it occurs on exposed surfaces . as a result , methods to reduce the activity of the exposed surface , such as passivation and chromate conversion , can increase a material 's corrosion resistance . however , some corrosion mechanisms are less visible and less predictable . the chemistry of corrosion is quite complex but it may be considered essentially as an electrochemical phenomenon . during corrosion at a particular spot on the surface of the object made of iron , oxidation takes place and that spot behaves as an anode . the electrons released at this anodic spot move through the metal and go to another spot on the metal and redox oxygen at that spot in presence of h + ( which is believed to be available from h₂co₃ formed due to dissolution of carbon dioxide from air into water in moist air condition of atmosphere . hydrogen ion in water may also be available due to dissolution of other acidic oxides from the atmosphere ) . this spot behaves as a cathode .