scattering is a term used in physics to describe a wide range of physical processes where moving particles or radiation of some form , such as light or sound , is forced to deviate from a straight trajectory by localized non-uniformities ( including particles and radiation ) in the medium through which they pass . in conventional use , this also includes deviation of reflected radiation from the angle predicted by the law of reflection . reflections of radiation that undergo scattering are often called diffuse reflections and unscattered reflections are called specular ( mirror-like ) reflections . originally , the term was confined to light scattering ( going back at least as far as isaac newton in the 17th century ) . as more '' ray '' -like phenomena were discovered , the idea of scattering was extended to them , so that william herschel could refer to the scattering of '' heat rays '' ( not then recognized as electromagnetic in nature ) in 1800 . john tyndall , a pioneer in light scattering research , noted the connection between light scattering and acoustic scattering in the 1870s . near the end of the 19th century , the scattering of cathode rays ( electron beams ) and x-rays was observed and discussed . with the discovery of subatomic particles ( e.g . ernest rutherford in 1911 ) and the development of quantum theory in the 20th century , the sense of the term became broader as it was recognized that the same mathematical frameworks used in light scattering could be applied to many other phenomena . scattering thus refers to particle collision between molecules , atoms , electrons , photons and other particles . examples include : cosmic ray scattering in the earth 's upper atmosphere ; particle collisions inside particle accelerators ; electron scattering by gas atoms in fluorescent lamps ; and neutron scattering inside nuclear reactors . seinfeld , john h . ; pandis , spyros n . ( 2006 ) . atmospheric chemistry and physics - from air pollution to climate change ( 2nd ed . ) . john wiley and sons , inc . the types of non-uniformities which can cause scattering , sometimes known as scatterers or scattering centers , are too numerous to list , but a small sample includes particles , bubbles , droplets , density fluctuations in fluids , crystallites in polycrystalline solids , defects in monocrystalline solids , surface roughness , cells in organisms , and textile fibers in clothing . the effects of such features on the path of almost any type of propagating wave or moving particle can be described in the framework of scattering theory . some areas where scattering and scattering theory are significant include radar sensing , medical ultrasound , semiconductor wafer inspection , polymerization process monitoring , acoustic tiling , free-space communications and computer-generated imagery . particle-particle scattering theory is important in areas such as particle physics , atomic , molecular , and optical physics , nuclear physics and astrophysics . in particle physics the quantum interaction and scattering of fundamental particles is described by the scattering matrix or s-matrix , introduced and developed by john archibald wheeler and werner heisenberg . scattering is quantified using many different concepts , including cross section ( physics ) ( σ ) , attenuation coefficients , the bidirectional scattering distribution function ( bsdf ) , s-matrix , and mean free path .