riesling ; is a white grape variety which originated in the rhine region . riesling is an aromatic grape variety displaying flowery , almost perfumed , aromas as well as high acidity . it is used to make dry , semi-sweet , sweet , and sparkling white wines . riesling wines are usually varietally pure and are seldom oaked . as of 2004 , riesling was estimated to be the world 's 20th most grown variety at ( with an increasing trend ) , j . robinson ( ed ) the oxford companion to wine third edition , oxford university press 2006 , pg . 746 : '' vine varieties '' , . but in terms of importance for quality wines , it is usually included in the '' top three '' white wine varieties together with chardonnay and sauvignon blanc . riesling is a variety which is highly '' terroir-expressive '' , meaning that the character of riesling wines is greatly influenced by the wine 's place of origin . in cool climates ( such as many german wine regions ) , riesling wines tend to exhibit apple and tree fruit notes with noticeable levels of acidity that are sometimes balanced with residual sugar . a ripe ( wine ) variety that can develop more citrus and peach notes is grown in warmer climates ( such as alsace and parts of austria ) . in australia , riesling is often noted for a characteristic lime note that tends to emerge in examples from the clare valley and eden valley in south australia . riesling 's naturally high acidity and pronounced fruit flavors give wines made from the grape exceptional aging potential , with well-made examples from favorable vintages often developing smokey , honey notes , and aged german rieslings , in particular , taking on a '' petrol '' character . wine & spirits education trust '' wine and spirits : understanding wine quality '' pgs 6-9 , second revised edition ( 2012 ) , london , . in 2015 , riesling was the most grown variety in germany with 23.0 % and , german wine institute : german wine statistics 2015-2016 . and in the french region of alsace with 21.9 % and . civa website , read on september 9 , 2007 . in germany , the variety is particularly widely planted in the mosel , rheingau , nahe and pfalz wine regions . there are also significant plantings of riesling in austria , slovenia , serbia , czech wine , slovakia , luxembourg , northern italy , australia , new zealand , canada , south africa , china , ukraine , and the united states ( washington , california , michigan and new york ) .