sociology of sport , alternately referred to as sports sociology , is a sub-discipline of sociology which focuses on sports as social phenomena . it is an area of study concerned with the relationship between sociology and sports , and also various socio-cultural structures , patterns , and organizations or groups involved with sport . this area of study discusses the positive impact sports have on individual people and society as a whole economically , financially , and socially . sociology of sport attempts to view the actions and behavior of sports teams and their players through the eyes of a sociologist . sport is regulated by regulations and rules of behavior , spatial and time constraints , and has governing bodies . it is oriented towards a goal , which makes known both the winner and the loser . it is competitive , and ludic . all sports are culturally situated , intertwined with the value systems and power relations within the host society . the emergence of the sociology of sport ( though not the name itself ) dates from the end of the 19th century , when first social psychological experiments dealing with group effects of competition and pace-making took place . besides cultural anthropology and its interest in games in the human culture , one of the first efforts to think about sports in a more general way was johan huizinga 's homo ludens or thorstein veblen 's theory of the leisure class . homo ludens discusses the importance of the element of play in culture and society . huizinga suggests that play , specifically sport , is primary to and a necessary condition of the generation of culture . these written works contributed to the rise of the study of sociology of sport . in 1970 , sports sociology gained significant attention as an organized , legitimate field of study . the north american society for the sociology of sport was formed in 1978 with the objective of studying the field . its research outlet , the sociology of sport journal , was formed in 1984 .