many types of fish migrate on a regular basis , on time scales ranging from daily to annually or longer , and over distances ranging from a few metres to thousands of kilometres . fish usually migrate to feed or to reproduce , but in other cases the reasons are unclear . migrations involve movements of the fish on a larger scale and duration than those arising during normal daily activities . dingle , hugh and drake , v . alistair ( 2007 ) '' what is migration ? '' . bioscience , 57 ( 2 ) :113–121 . some particular types of migration are anadromous , in which adult fish live in the sea and migrate into fresh water to spawn , and catadromous , in which adult fish live in fresh water and migrate into salt water to spawn . marine forage fish often make large migrations between their spawning , feeding and nursery grounds . movements are associated with ocean currents and with the availability of food in different areas at different times of year . the migratory movements may partly be linked to the fact that the fish can not identify their own offspring and moving in this way prevents cannibalism . some species have been described by the united nations convention on the law of the sea as highly migratory species . these are large pelagic fish that move in and out of the exclusive economic zones of different nations , and these are covered differently in the treaty from other fish . salmon and striped bass are well-known anadromous fish , and freshwater eels are catadromous fish that make large migrations . the bull shark is a euryhaline species that moves at will from fresh to salt water , and many marine fish make a diel vertical migration , rising to the surface to feed at night and sinking to lower layers of the ocean by day . some fish such as tuna move to the north and south at different times of year following temperature gradients . the patterns of migration are of great interest to the fishing industry . movements of fish in fresh water also occur ; often the fish swim upriver to spawn , and these traditional movements are increasingly being disrupted by the building of dams .