the entente cordiale ( english : cordial agreement ) comprised a series of agreements signed on 8 april 1904 between the united kingdom and the french republic which saw a significant improvement in anglo-french relations . margaret macmillan , the war that ended peace : the road to 1914 ( 2013 ) ch 6 beyond the immediate concerns of colonial demarcation addressed by the agreement , the signing of the entente cordiale marked the end of almost a thousand years of intermittent conflict between the two states and their predecessors , and replaced the modus vivendi that had existed since the end of the napoleonic wars in 1815 with a more formal agreement . a.j.p . taylor , the struggle for mastery in europe , 1848–1918 ( 1954 ) pp 408–17 the entente cordiale represented the culmination of the policy of théophile delcassé ( france 's foreign minister from 1898 to 1905 ) , who believed that a franco-british understanding would give france some security in western europe against any german system of alliances ( see triple alliance ( 1882 ) ) . credit for the success of the negotiation of the entente cordiale belongs chiefly to paul cambon ( france 's ambassador in london from 1898 to 1920 ) and to the british foreign secretary , lord lansdowne . the most important feature of the agreement was the mutual recognition that the uk was in full control of egypt and likewise french morocco ( with the proviso that france 's eventual dispositions for morocco include reasonable allowance for spain 's interests there ) . at the same time , britain ceded the los islands ( off french guinea ) to france , defined the frontier of nigeria in france 's favour , and agreed to french control of the upper gambia valley ; while france renounced its exclusive right to certain fisheries off newfoundland . furthermore , french and british proposed zones of influence in siam ( thailand ) , which was eventually decided not to be colonised , were outlined , with the eastern territories , adjacent to french indochina , becoming a proposed french zone , and the western , adjacent to burmese tenasserim , a proposed british zone . arrangements were also made to allay the rivalry between british and french colonists in the new hebrides . in signing of the entente cordiale both powers reduced the virtual isolation into which they had withdrawn—france involuntarily , britain complacently—while they had eyed each other over african affairs . britain had no major power ally anglo-japanese alliance , which held little in european waters ; france had none but the russian empire , soon to become militarily discredited in the russo-japanese war of 1904–05 . the agreement upset the diplomacy of germany , whose policy had long relied on franco-british antagonism . a german attempt to check the french in morocco in 1905 ( the tangier incident , or first moroccan crisis ) , and thus to upset the entente , served only to strengthen it . military discussions between the french and the british general staffs were soon initiated . franco-british solidarity was confirmed at the algeciras conference ( 1906 ) and reconfirmed in the agadir crisis ( 1911 ) .