was a guerrilla war fought in the federation of malaya between pro-independence fighters of the malayan races liberation army ( mnla ) , the armed wing of the malayan communist party ( mcp ) , against the armed forces of the british military and commonwealth . the war was fought over attempts by communist forces to gain independence for malaya from the british empire and to establish a socialist economy . the fighting spanned both the colonial period and the creation of an independent malaya ( 1957 ) . although it was referred to as '' the emergency '' by colonial authorities , the mnla referred to it as the '' anti-british national liberation war '' . the conflict was called an '' emergency '' by the british for insurance purposes , as london-based insurers would not have paid out in instances of civil wars . in june 1948 , the british malaya declared a state of emergency in british malaya after the killing of three british farmers during attacks on plantations . under the leadership of chin peng , communist activists regrouped in the malayan jungles and formed the mnla to wage a guerrilla war against british colonial rule . many mnla fighters were former members of the malayan peoples ' anti-japanese army ( mpaja ) , a communist guerrilla army which was trained , armed and funded by the british to fight against the imperial japanese army during the wwii . the majority of support for the communist rebels came from the ethnic lower-class straits chinese population , most of which lived in dire poverty , were subject to racial persecution , and were barred from voting in elections . the communists ' belief in class consciousness , in addition to ethnic and gender equality , allowed many indigenous orang asli as well as women to join the mnla and their civilian support network , the min yuen . however , the mnla failed to gain any major following due to the association of communism with china and the soviet union in the midst of the cold war , and the conflicting communist ideologies against religion . after establishing a series of jungle bases the mnla began conducting raiding british colonial police and military installations . tin mines and rubber plantations were attacked by communist guerrillas in an attempt to gain independence for malaya by making the colonial occupation too expensive for the british to maintain . the british attempted to starve the communist guerrillas by implementing a food denial campaign which saw the enforcement of food rationing , the killing of livestock and aerial spraying of chemical herbicides to destroy rural farmland . early in the conflict , british attempts to defeat the communists included some extrajudicial killings of unarmed villagers , the most infamous case being the batang kali massacre which is often referred to as '' britain 's my lai '' . furthermore , the briggs ' plan was enacted to imprison 500,000 people ( or up to 10 % of the malayan population at the time ) into internment camps called '' new villages '' , despite it being a violation of the geneva conventions . the orang asli were also targeted for forced relocation by the briggs ' plan because the british believed that they were supporting the communists . british military experiences during the emergency would lay the groundwork for future anti-insurgency operations , most famously in the vietnam war as american forces ( largely unsuccessfully ) attempted to replicate british strategies used in malaya . although the emergency was declared over in 1960 , communist leader chin peng renewed the insurgency against the malaysian government in 1967 . this second phase of the insurgency lasted until 1989 , when a peace agreement was signed in hat yai , thailand .