classical conditioning ( also known as pavlovian or respondent conditioning ) refers to a learning procedure in which a biologically potent stimulus ( e.g . food ) is paired with a previously neutral stimulus ( e.g . a bell ) . it also refers to the learning process that results from this pairing , through which the neutral stimulus comes to elicit a response ( e.g . salivation ) that is usually similar to the one elicited by the potent stimulus . classical conditioning is distinct from operant conditioning ( also called instrumental conditioning ) , through which the strength of a voluntary behavior is modified by reinforcement or punishment . however , classical conditioning can affect operant conditioning in various ways ; notably , classically conditioned stimuli may serve to reinforce operant responses . classical conditioning was first studied in detail by ivan pavlov , who conducted experiments with dogs and published his findings in 1897 . during the russian physiologist 's study of digestion , pavlov observed that the dogs serving as his subjects drooled when they were being served meat . classical conditioning is a basic learning process , and its neural substrates are now beginning to be understood . though it is sometimes hard to distinguish classical conditioning from other forms of associative learning ( e.g . instrumental learning and human associative memory ) , a number of observations differentiate them , especially the contingencies whereby learning occurs . together with operant conditioning , classical conditioning became the foundation of behaviorism , a school of psychology which was dominant in the mid-20th century and is still an important influence on the practice of psychotherapy and the study of animal behavior . classical conditioning has been applied in other areas as well . for example , it may affect the body 's response to psychoactive drugs , the regulation of hunger , research on the neural basis of learning and memory , and in certain social phenomena such as the false consensus effect .