hoppus began to dress like frontman robert smith , donning eyeliner and '' occasionally bright red lipstick '' to his high school classes ( '' this all went over exceedingly well with the faculty and staff in the small desert town where i grew up , '' hoppus remarked in 2009 ) . beginning in his first year , hoppus gained solace through music of both the cure and the smiths . hoppus played by himself and sang in the band pier 69 , primarily covering songs by the cure , and recorded a live demo with a group named the attic children in 1988 , featuring covers of the cure songs . hoppus returned to ridgecrest in 1989 , completing high school at burroughs high school . in his teen years , a friend of hoppus would steal his mother 's car in the middle of the night and pick hoppus up ; the two would sneak out to the desert and burn trees and any objects they could find . after graduating from burroughs high school in 1990 , he began playing in a band called of all things he formed with two friends , covering songs by descendents , social distortion and bad religion , as well as writing original punk numbers . the group primarily performed at friend 's parties and bonfires , and once played oasis , the local music venue . hoppus left ridgecrest in summer 1992 to attend college and get a job at a local music store in san diego . hoppus continued playing gigs with of all things , returning on weekends . eventually , hoppus ' manager became suspicious of his weekend activities ( hoppus having told him he worked with mentally disabled children in ridgecrest ) and refused any time off on weekends . his '' short lived attempt '' at college , studying at california state university , san marcos , revolved around plans to become an english teacher . he recalls he '' hated '' college and his reasoning behind becoming a teacher involved sights set for education reform . he dropped out in the early 1990s after '' things began to take off with blink-182 '' and lived with his mother for many of the early years of the band . hoppus describes his mother as always supportive in his decisions to drop out of college and tour with blink-182 ; however , he describes his father as '' more realistic , . he said , 'have something to fall back on . ' '' '' i 'm really fortunate that my mom always completely supported me , even to the point that i dropped out of college and lived at her house for five years before our band started to catch on , '' said hoppus .