mars pathfinder ( mesur pathfinder ) is an american robotic spacecraft that landed a base station with a roving probe on mars in 1997 . it consisted of a lander , renamed the carl sagan memorial station , and a lightweight ( 10.6 & nbsp ; kg/23 & nbsp ; lb ) wheeled robotic mars rover named sojourner , which became the first rover to operate outside the earth–moon system . launched on december 4 , 1996 by nasa aboard a delta ii booster a month after the mars global surveyor was launched , it landed on july 4 , 1997 on mars 's ares vallis , in a region called chryse planitia in the oxia palus quadrangle . the lander then opened , exposing the rover which conducted many experiments on the martian surface . the mission carried a series of scientific instruments to analyze the martian atmosphere , climate , and geology and the composition of its rocks and soil . it was the second project from nasa 's discovery program , which promotes the use of low-cost spacecraft and frequent launches under the motto '' cheaper , faster and better '' promoted by then-administrator daniel goldin . the mission was directed by the jet propulsion laboratory ( jpl ) , a division of the california institute of technology , responsible for nasa 's mars exploration program . the project manager was jpl 's tony spear . this mission was the first of a series of missions to mars that included rovers , and was the first successful lander since the two vikings landed on the red planet in 1976 . although the soviet union successfully sent rovers to the moon as part of the lunokhod program in the 1970s , its attempts to use rovers in its mars program failed . in addition to scientific objectives , the mars pathfinder mission was also a '' proof-of-concept '' for various technologies , such as airbag-mediated touchdown and automated obstacle avoidance , both later exploited by the mars exploration rover mission . the mars pathfinder was also remarkable for its extremely low cost relative to other robotic space missions to mars . originally , the mission was conceived as the first of the mars environmental survey ( mesur ) program .