a circus is a company of performers who put on diverse entertainment shows that may include clowns , acrobats , trained animals , trapeze acts , musicians , dancers , hoopers , tightrope walkers , juggling , magicians , unicycle , as well as other object manipulation and stunt-oriented artists . the term circus also describes the performance which has followed various formats through its 250-year modern history . although not the inventor of the medium , philip astley is credited as the father of the modern circus . in 1768 astley , a skilled equestrian , began performing exhibitions of trick horse riding in an open field called ha'penny hatch on the south side of the thames river . in 1770 he hired acrobats , tightrope walkers , jugglers and a clown to fill in the pauses between the equestrian demonstrations and thus chanced on the format which was later named a '' circus '' . performances developed significantly over the next fifty years , with large-scale theatrical battle reenactments becoming a significant feature . the traditional format , in which a ringmaster introduces a variety of choreographed acts set to music , developed in the latter part of the 19th century and remained the dominant format until the 1970s . as styles of performance have developed since the time of astley , so too have the types of venues where these circuses have performed . the earliest modern circuses were performed in open-air structures with limited covered seating . from the late 18th to late 19th century , custom-made circus buildings ( often wooden ) were built with various types of seating , a centre ring , and sometimes a stage . the traditional large tents commonly known as '' big tops '' were introduced in the mid-19th century as touring circuses superseded static venues . these tents eventually became the most common venue . contemporary circuses perform in a variety of venues including tents , theatres and casinos . many circus performances are still held in a ring , usually 13 & nbsp ; m ( 42 & nbsp ; ft ) in diameter . this dimension was adopted by astley in the late 18th century as the minimum diameter that enabled an acrobatic horse rider to stand upright on a cantering horse to perform their tricks . contemporary circus has been credited with a revival of the circus tradition since the late 1970s , when a number of groups began to experiment with new circus formats and aesthetics , typically avoiding the use of animals to focus exclusively on human artistry . circuses within the movement have tended to favor a theatrical approach , combining character-driven circus acts with original music in a broad variety of styles to convey complex themes or stories . contemporary circus continues to develop new variations on the circus tradition while absorbing new skills , techniques and stylistic influences from other performing arts .