nonetheless , the first stage of the country 's expansionism into the pacific began only a decade later , in 1851 , when—in response to an american incursion into the juan fernández islands—chile 's government formally organized the islands into a subdelegation of valparaíso . that same year , chile 's economic interest in the pacific were renewed after its merchant navy briefly succeeded in creating an agricultural goods exchange market that connected the californian port of san francisco with australia . by 1861 , chile had established a lucrative enterprise across the pacific , its chilean peso abundantly circulating throughout polynesia and its merchants trading in the markets of tahiti , new zealand , tasmania , shanghai ; negotiations were also made with the spanish philippines , and altercations reportedly occurred between chilean and american whalers in the sea of japan.this period ended as a result of the bombardment of valparaíso by spanish forces in 1866 , during the chincha islands war . chile 's polynesian aspirations would again be awakened in the aftermath of the country 's decisive victory against peru in the war of the pacific , which left the chilean fleet as the dominant maritime force in the pacific coast of the americas . valparaíso had also become the most important port in the pacific coast of south america , providing chilean merchants with the capacity to find markets in the pacific for its new mineral wealth acquired from the atacama . during this period , the chilean intellectual and politician benjamín vicuña mackenna ( who served as senator in the national congress from 1876 to 1885 ) was an influential voice in favor of chilean expansionism into the pacific—he considered that spain 's discoveries in the pacific had been stolen by the british , and envisioned that chile 's duty was to create an empire in the pacific that would reach asia . in the context of this imperialist fervor is that , in 1886 , captain policarpo toro of the chilean navy proposed to his superiors the annexation of easter island ; a proposal which was supported by president josé manuel balmaceda because of the island 's apparent strategic location and economic value . after toro transferred the rights to the island 's sheep ranching operations from tahiti-based businesses to the chilean-based williamson-balfour company in 1887 , easter island 's annexation process was culminated with the signing of the '' agreement of wills '' between rapa nui chieftains and toro , in name of the chilean government , in 1888 . see : by occupying easter island , chile joined the imperial nations . william sater , chile and the united states : empires in conflict , 1990 by the university of georgia press , by 1900 nearly all oceania islands were in control of britain , france , united states , germany , japan , mexico , ecuador and chile .