growth hormone ( gh ) or somatotropin , also known as human growth hormones ( hgh or hgh ) in its human form , is a peptide hormone that stimulates growth , cell reproduction , and cell regeneration in humans and other animals . it is thus important in human development . gh also stimulates production of igf-1 and increases the concentration of glucose and free fatty acids . it is a type of mitogen which is specific only to the receptors on certain types of cells . gh is a 191-amino acid , single-chain polypeptide that is synthesized , stored and secreted by somatotropic cells within the lateral wings of the anterior pituitary gland . a recombinant form of hgh called somatropin ( inn ) is used as a prescription drug to treat children 's growth disorders and adult growth hormone deficiency . in the united states , it is only available legally from pharmacies by prescription from a licensed health care provider . in recent years in the united states , some health care providers are prescribing growth hormone in the elderly to increase vitality . while legal , the efficacy and safety of this use for hgh has not been tested in a clinical trial . many of the functions of hgh remain unknown . in its role as an anabolic agent , hgh has been used by competitors in sports since at least 1982 , and has been banned by the ioc and ncaa . traditional urine analysis does not detect doping with hgh , so the ban was not enforced until the early 2000s , when blood tests that could distinguish between natural and artificial hgh were starting to be developed . blood tests conducted by wada at the 2004 olympic games in athens , greece targeted primarily hgh . use of the drug for performance enhancement is not currently approved by the fda . gh has been studied for use in raising livestock more efficiently in industrial agriculture and several efforts have been made to obtain governmental approval to use gh in livestock production . these uses have been controversial . in the united states , the only fda-approved use of gh for livestock is the use of a cow-specific form of gh called bovine somatotropin for increasing milk production in dairy cows . retailers are permitted to label containers of milk as produced with or without bovine somatotropin .