radio-frequency identification ( rfid ) uses electromagnetic fields to automatically identify and track tags attached to objects . an rfid system consists of a tiny radio transponder , a radio receiver and transmitter . when triggered by an electromagnetic interrogation pulse from a nearby rfid reader device , the tag transmits digital data , usually an identifying inventory number , back to the reader . this number can be used to track inventory goods . there are two types of rfid tags : passive tags are powered by energy from the rfid reader 's interrogating radio waves . active tags are powered by a battery and thus can be read at a greater range from the rfid reader , up to hundreds of meters . unlike a barcode , the tag does not need to be within the line of sight of the reader , so it may be embedded in the tracked object . rfid is one method of automatic identification and data capture ( aidc ) . automatic identification and data collection ( aidc ) rfid tags are used in many industries . for example , an rfid tag attached to an automobile during production can be used to track its progress through the assembly line , rfid-tagged pharmaceuticals can be tracked through warehouses , and microchip implant ( animal ) in livestock and pets enables positive identification of animals . since rfid tags can be attached to physical money , clothing , and possessions , or implanted in animals and people , the possibility of reading personally-linked information without consent has raised serious privacy concerns . these concerns resulted in standard specifications development addressing privacy and security issues . iso/iec 18000 and iso/iec 29167 use on-chip cryptography methods for untraceability , tag and reader authentication , and over-the-air privacy . iso/iec 20248 specifies a digital signature data structure for rfid and barcodes providing data , source and read method authenticity . this work is done within iso/iec jtc 1/sc 31 automatic identification and data capture techniques . tags can also be used in shops to expedite checkout , and to prevent theft by customers and employees . in 2014 , the world rfid market was worth us 8.89 billion , up from us 7.77 billion in 2013 and us 6.96 billion in 2012 . this figure includes tags , readers , and software/services for rfid cards , labels , fobs , and all other form factors . the market value is expected to rise from us 12.08 billion in 2020 to us 16.23 billion by 2029 .