color television is a television transmission technology that includes information on the color of the picture , so the video image can be displayed in color on the television set . it is considered an improvement on the earliest television technology , monochrome or black-and-white television , in which the image is displayed in shades of gray ( grayscale ) . television broadcasting stations and networks in most parts of the world upgraded from black-and-white to color transmission between the 1960s and the 1980s . the invention of color television standards is an important part of the history of television , and it is described in the technology of television article . transmission of color images using mechanical scanners had been conceived as early as the 1880s . a practical demonstration of mechanically scanned color television was given by john logie baird in 1928 , but the limitations of a mechanical system were apparent even then . development of electronic scanning and display made an all-electronic system possible . early monochrome transmission standards were developed prior to world war ii , but civilian electronics developments were frozen during much of the war . in august 1944 , baird gave the world 's first demonstration of a practical fully electronic color television display . in the united states , commercially competing color standards were developed , finally resulting in the ntsc standard for color that retained compatibility with the prior monochrome system . although the ntsc color standard was proclaimed in 1953 and limited programming became available , it was not until the early 1970s that color television in north america outsold black-and-white or monochrome units . color broadcasting in europe was not standardized on the pal and secam formats until the 1960s . broadcasters began to switch from analog color television technology to digital television 2006 . this changeover is now complete in many countries , but analog television is still the standard elsewhere .