a language isolate is a language that is unrelated to any others . in the absolute sense , it is a natural language with no demonstrable genetic relationship ( linguistics ) —one that has not been demonstrated to descend from an ancestor common with any other language . language isolates are in effect language family consisting of a single language . commonly cited examples include basque , sumerian , and elamite , though in each case a minority of linguists claim to have demonstrated a relationship with other languages . some sources use the term '' language isolate '' to indicate a branch of a larger family with only one surviving member . for instance , albanian , armenian and greek are commonly called indo-european isolates . while part of the indo-european family , they do not belong to any established branch ( such as the romance , indo-iranian , celtic , slavic or germanic branches ) , but instead form independent branches . similarly , within the romance languages , sardinian is a relative isolate . however , without a qualifier , isolate is understood to mean having no demonstrable genetic relationship to any other language . some languages once seen as isolates may be reclassified as small families . this happened with japanese ( now included in the japonic family along with ryukyuan languages such as okinawan ) , ainu in ainu languages and korean in koreanic languages with jeju language . the etruscan language of italy has long been considered an isolate , but some have proposed that it is related to the so-called tyrsenian languages , an extinct family of closely related ancient languages proposed by helmut rix in 1998 , including the rhaetian language , formerly spoken in the central alps , and the lemnian language , formerly spoken on the greek island of lemnos . language isolates may be seen as a special case of unclassified languages that remain unclassified even after extensive efforts . if such efforts eventually do prove fruitful , a language previously considered an isolate may no longer be considered one , as happened with the yanyuwa language of northern australia , which has been placed in the pama–nyungan family . since linguists do not always agree on whether a genetic relationship has been demonstrated , it is often disputed whether a language is an isolate or not .