edible mushrooms are the fleshy and eating fruit bodies of several species of macrofungi ( fungi which bear fruiting structures that are large enough to be seen with the naked eye ) . they can appear either below ground ( hypogeous ) or above ground ( epigeous ) where they may be picked by hand . edibility may be defined by criteria that include absence of poisonous effects on humans and desirable taste and aroma . edible mushrooms are consumed for their nutritional and cuisine value . mushrooms , especially dried shiitake , are sources of umami flavor from guanylate . mushrooms consumed by those practicing folk medicine are known as medicinal fungi . while psychedelic mushrooms are occasionally consumed for recreational or entheogenic purposes , they can produce psychological effects , and are therefore not commonly used as food . while there is no evidence ( as of 2019 ) from high-quality clinical research that '' medicinal '' mushrooms have an effect on human diseases , a number of potential medicinal effects have been shown in non-clinical studies edible mushrooms include many fungal species that are either harvested wild or cultivated . easily cultivated and common wild mushrooms are often available in markets , and those that are more difficult to obtain ( such as the prized truffle , matsutake and morel ) may be collected on a smaller scale by private gatherers . some preparations may render certain mushroom poisoning fit for consumption . before assuming that any wild mushroom is edible , it should be identified . accurate determination and proper identification of a species is the only safe way to ensure edibility , and the only safeguard against possible accident . some mushrooms that are edible for most people can cause allergic reactions in some individuals , and old or improperly stored specimens can cause food poisoning . great care should therefore be taken when eating any fungus for the first time , and only small quantities should be consumed in case of individual allergies . deadly poisonous mushrooms that are frequently confused with edible mushrooms and responsible for many fatal poisonings include several species of the genus amanita , in particular , amanita phalloides , the death cap . it is therefore better to eat only a few , easily recognizable species , than to experiment indiscriminately . moreover , even normally edible species of mushrooms may be dangerous , as mushrooms growing in polluted locations can accumulate pollutants such as heavy metals .