the saka , śaka , shaka , śāka or sacae ; brahmi : : , were a group of nomadic iranian peoples who historically inhabited the northern and eastern eurasian steppe and the tarim basin . '' modern scholars have mostly used the name saka to refer to iranians of the eastern steppe and tarim basin '' '' in modern scholarship the name 'sakas ' is reserved for the ancient tribes of northern and eastern central asia and eastern turkestan to distinguish them from the related massagetae of the aral region and the scythians of the pontic steppes . these tribes spoke iranian languages , and their chief occupation was nomadic pastoralism . '' though closely related , the sakas are to be distinguished from the scythians of the pontic steppe and the massagetae of the aral sea region , '' horse-riding nomadism has been referred to as the culture of 'early nomads ' . this term encompasses different ethnic groups ( such as scythians , saka , massagetae , and yuezhi ) . '' although they form part of the wider scythian cultures . like the european scythians , the sakas were ultimately derived from the earlier andronovo culture . saka language formed part of the scythian languages . prominent archaeological remains of the sakas include arzhan , tunnug , the pazyryk burials , the issyk kurgan , saka kurgan tombs , the barrows of tasmola and possibly tillya tepe . in the 2nd century bc , many sakas were driven by the yuezhi from the steppe into sogdia and bactria and then to the northwest of the indian subcontinent , where they were known as the indo-scythians . '' the saka , or śaka , people then began their long migration that ended with their conquest of northern india , where they are also known as the indo-scythians . '' other sakas invaded the parthian empire , eventually settling in sistan , while others may have migrated to the dian kingdom in yunnan , china . in the tarim basin and taklamakan desert region of northwest china , they settled in khotan , yarkand , kashgar and other places , which were at various times vassals to greater powers , such as han china and tang china .