home rule is government of a colony , dependent country , or region by its own citizens . it is thus the power of a constituent part ( administrative division ) of a state to exercise such of the state 's powers of governance within its own administrative area that have been decentralized to it by the central government . in the anglo-celtic isles , it traditionally referred to self-government , devolution or independence of its constituent nations—initially ireland , and later scotland , wales , and northern ireland . in the united states and other countries organised as federation , the term usually refers to the process and mechanisms of self-government as exercised by municipalities , counties , or other units of local government at the level below that of a federal state ( e.g . , us state , in which context see special legislation ) . it can also refer to the system under which greenland and the faroe islands are associated with denmark . home rule is not , however , equivalent to federalism . whereas states in a federal system of government ( e.g . , canada , germany , switzerland , brazil , ethiopia and the united states ) have a guaranteed constitutional existence , a devolved home rule system of government is created by ordinary legislation and can be reformed , or even abolished , by repeal or amendment of that ordinary legislation . a legislature may , for example , create home rule for an administrative division , such as a province , a county , or a department , so that a local county council , county commission , parish council , or board of supervisors may have jurisdiction over its unincorporated areas , including important issues like zoning . without this , the division is simply an extension of the higher government . the legislature can also establish or eliminate municipal corporations , which have home rule within town or city limits through the city council . the higher government could also abolish counties/townships , redefine their boundaries , or dissolve their home-rule governments , according to the relevant laws .