the amazon river dolphin ( inia geoffrensis ) , also known as the boto , bufeo or pink river dolphin , is a species of toothed whale classified in the family iniidae . three subspecies are currently recognized : i . g . geoffrensis ( amazon river dolphin ) , i . g . boliviensis ( bolivian river dolphin ) and i . g . humboldtiana ( orinoco river dolphin ) while position of araguaian river dolphin ( i . araguaiaensis ) within the clade is still unclear . the three subspecies are distributed in the amazon basin , the upper madeira river in bolivia , and the orinoco basin , respectively . the amazon river dolphin is the largest species of river dolphin , with adult males reaching in weight , and in length . adults acquire a pink color , more prominent in males , giving it its nickname '' pink river dolphin '' . sexual dimorphism is very evident , with males measuring 16 % longer and weighing 55 % more than females . like other toothed whales , they have a melon , an organ that is used for biosonar . the dorsal fin , although short in height , is regarded as long , and the pectoral fins are also large . the fin size , unfused vertebrae , and its relative size allow for improved manoeuvrability when navigating flooded forests and capturing prey . they have one of the widest ranging diets among toothed whales , and feed on up to 53 different species of fish , such as croakers , catfish , tetras and piranhas . they also consume other animals such as river turtles and freshwater crabs . in 2008 , this species was ranked by the international union for conservation of nature ( iucn ) as being data deficient , due to the uncertainty regarding its population trends and the impact of threats . while hunting is a major threat , in recent decades greater impacts on population have been due to the loss of habitat and inadvertent entanglement in fishing lines . it is the only species of river dolphin kept in captivity , mainly in venezuela and europe ; however , it is difficult to train and a high mortality rate is seen among captive individuals .