aestheticism ( also the aesthetic movement ) was an art movement , both practical and theoretical , of the late 19th century supporting an emphasis on aesthetic value and effects— in preference to the socio-political themes and positions— of literature , fine art , music and other arts . denney , colleen . '' at the temple of art : the grosvenor gallery , 1877-1890 '' , issue 1165 , p . 38 , fairleigh dickinson university press , 2000 this meant that the art of the movement was produced with a view toward being beautiful first and foremost , rather than serving a moral , allegorical , doctrinal or other such purpose & nbsp ; — '' art for art 's sake '' . it was particularly prominent in england during the late 19th century , supported by notable writers such as walter pater and oscar wilde , having started in a small way in the 1860s in the studios and houses of a radical group of artists and designers , including william morris and dante gabriel rossetti , reformers who explored new ways of living in defiance of the design standards of the age as revealed in the 1851 great exhibition at hyde park , london . flourishing in the 1870s and 1880s , critic walter hamilton was the first writer to name the movement , publishing the aesthetic movement in england in 1882 . aestheticism challenged the values of mainstream victorian culture , as many victorians believed that literature and art fulfilled important ethical roles . writing in the guardian , fiona mccarthy states , “ the aesthetic movement stood in stark and sometimes shocking contrast to the crass materialism of britain in the 19th century . ” by the 1890s , decadence , a term with origins in common with aestheticism , was in use across europe . more recently the critic and academic harold bloom has proffered comparable but distinct literary critiques to those of the aesthetic movement , arguing against projecting social and political ideology onto literary works , which he believed was a growing problem in humanities departments over the 20th century .