hyponatremia is a low sodium concentration in the blood . it is generally defined as a sodium concentration of less than 135 mmol/l ( 135 meq/l ) , with severe hyponatremia being below 120 meq/l . symptoms can be absent , mild or severe . mild symptoms include a decreased ability to think , headaches , nausea , and poor balance . severe symptoms include confusion , seizures , and coma . the causes of hyponatremia are typically classified by a person 's body fluid status into low volume , normal volume , or high volume . low volume hyponatremia can occur from diarrhea , vomiting , diuretics , and sweating . normal volume hyponatremia is divided into cases with dilute urine and concentrated urine . cases in which the urine is dilute include adrenal insufficiency , hypothyroidism , and polydipsia or potomania . cases in which the urine is concentrated include syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion ( siadh ) . high volume hyponatremia can occur from heart failure , liver failure , and kidney failure . conditions that can lead to falsely low sodium measurements include hyperproteinemia such as in multiple myeloma , hyperlipidemia , and hyperglycemia . treatment is based on the underlying cause . correcting hyponatremia too quickly can lead to complications . rapid partial correction with 3 % normal saline is only recommended in those with significant symptoms and occasionally those in whom the condition was of rapid onset . low volume hyponatremia is typically treated with intravenous normal saline . siadh is typically treated by correcting the underlying cause and with fluid restriction while high volume hyponatremia is typically treated with both fluid restriction and a diet low in salt . correction should generally be gradual in those in whom the low levels have been present for more than two days . hyponatremia is the most common type of electrolyte imbalance . it occurs in about 20 % of those admitted to hospital and 10 % of people during or after an endurance sporting event . among those in hospital , hyponatremia is associated with an increased risk of death . the economic costs of hyponatremia are estimated at 2.6 billion in the united states .