the laryngeal theory is a widely accepted hypothesis in the historical linguistics of the indo-european languages positing that : proto-indo-european language ( pie ) had a series of phonemes beyond those reconstructable by the comparative method . these phonemes , according to the most-accepted variant of the theory , were '' laryngeal '' consonants of an indeterminate place of articulation towards the back of the mouth . the theory aims to : produce greater regularity in the reconstruction of pie phonology than from the reconstruction that is produced by the comparative method . extend the general occurrence of the indo-european ablaut to syllables with reconstructed vowel phonemes other than e or o . in its earlier form ( history ) , the theory proposed two sounds in pie . combined with a reconstructed e or o , the sounds produce vowel phonemes that would not otherwise be predicted by the rules of ablaut . the theory received considerable support after the decipherment of hittite , which revealed it to be an indo-european language . many hittite words were shown to be derived from pie , with a phoneme represented as ḫ corresponding to one of the hypothetical pie sounds . subsequent scholarship has established a set of rules by which an ever-increasing number of reflexes in daughter languages may be derived from pie roots . the number of explanations thus achieved and the simplicity of the postulated system have both led to widespread acceptance of the theory . in its most widely accepted version , the theory posits three phonemes in pie : h₁ , h₂ , and h₃ ( see below ) . other daughter languages inherited the derived sounds , resulting from their merger with pie short vowels and their subsequent loss . the phonemes are now recognized as consonants , related to articulation in the general area of the larynx , where a consonantal gesture may affect vowel quality . they are regularly known as laryngeal , but the actual place of articulation for each consonant remains a matter of debate . ( see below ) . the laryngeals got their name because they were believed by hermann möller and albert cuny to have had a pharyngeal , epiglottal , or glottal place of articulation , involving a constriction near the larynx . while this is still possible , many linguists now think of '' laryngeals '' , or some of them , as having been velar or uvular . the evidence for their existence is mostly indirect , as will be shown below , but the theory serves as an elegant explanation for several properties of the pie vowel system that made no sense until the theory , such as the '' independent '' schwas ( as in pəter- 'father ' ) . also , the hypothesis that pie schwa ə was a consonant , not a vowel , provides an elegant explanation for some apparent exceptions to brugmann 's law in indic languages .