conceptual art , also referred to as conceptualism , is art in which the concept ( s ) or idea ( s ) involved in the work take precedence over traditional aesthetic , technical , and material concerns . some works of conceptual art , sometimes called installations , may be constructed by anyone simply by following a set of written instructions . this method was fundamental to american artist sol lewitt 's definition of conceptual art , one of the first to appear in print : tony godfrey , author of conceptual art ( art & ideas ) ( 1998 ) , asserts that conceptual art questions the nature of art , a notion that joseph kosuth elevated to a definition of art itself in his seminal , early manifesto of conceptual art , art after philosophy ( 1969 ) . the notion that art should examine its own nature was already a potent aspect of the influential art critic clement greenberg 's vision of modern art during the 1950s . with the emergence of an exclusively language-based art in the 1960s , however , conceptual artists such as art & language , joseph kosuth ( who became the american editor of art-language ) , and lawrence weiner began a far more radical interrogation of art than was previously possible ( see below ) . one of the first and most important things they questioned was the common assumption that the role of the artist was to create special kinds of physical art . joseph kosuth , art after philosophy ( 1969 ) . reprinted in peter osborne , conceptual art : themes and movements , phaidon , london , 2002 . p . 232 art & language , art-language the journal of conceptual art : introduction ( 1969 ) . reprinted in osborne ( 2002 ) p . 230 ian burn , mel ramsden : '' notes on analysis '' ( 1970 ) . reprinted in osborne ( 2003 ) , p . 237 . e.g . '' the outcome of much of the 'conceptual ' work of the past two years has been to carefully clear the air of objects . '' through its association with the young british artists and the turner prize during the 1990s , in popular usage , particularly in the united kingdom , '' conceptual art '' came to denote all contemporary art that does not practice the traditional skills of painting and sculpture . '' turner prize history : conceptual art '' . tate gallery . tate.org.uk . accessed august 8 , 2006 one of the reasons why the term '' conceptual art '' has come to be associated with various contemporary practices far removed from its original aims and forms lies in the problem of defining the term itself . as the artist mel bochner suggested as early as 1970 , in explaining why he does not like the epithet '' conceptual '' , it is not always entirely clear what '' concept '' refers to , and it runs the risk of being confused with '' intention '' . thus , in describing or defining a work of art as conceptual it is important not to confuse what is referred to as '' conceptual '' with an artist 's '' intention '' .