the united states department of the interior wrote in its report that the center was '' one of the most successful urban planning projects in the history of american architecture '' . columbia university was not making enough money from rockefeller center leases by the 1970s , since a series of negotiations with rockefeller center inc . ( now rockefeller group ) had effectively reduced the annual lease payment to 11 million . the university 's funds had dwindled so much that by 1972 , their expenses were paid for by their endowment fund . in 1983 , columbia university started looking to sell the land beneath rockefeller center . two years later , columbia agreed to sell the land to the rockefeller group for 400 million . the rockefeller group immediately set out to modernize many aspects of the complex . the rainbow room was closed for a 20 million restoration and expansion that brought the restaurant 's floor area to , and it reopened in december 1987 . the rca building 's observation deck was subsequently closed because the rainbow room 's expansion eliminated the only passageway to the observatory 's elevator bank . in mid-1988 , the rca building was renamed the ge building . mitsubishi estate , a real estate company of the mitsubishi , purchased the rockefeller group in 1989 . seven years later , in july 1996 , the entire complex was purchased by a consortium of owners that included goldman sachs ( which had 50 percent ownership ) , gianni agnelli , stavros niarchos , and david rockefeller , who organized the consortium . before the sale was even completed , the consortium sold of space in 30 rockefeller plaza to nbc , who had rented that space in the tower since the beginning . tishman speyer , led by jerry speyer , a close friend of david rockefeller , and the lester crown of chicago , bought the original 14 buildings and land in 2000 for 1.85 billion . owing to the decline of the newsreel theater industry , the guild was shuttered in late 1999 after tishman speyer decided not to renew its lease . tishman speyer also decided to renovate the complex 's retail spaces and underground concourse . the rainbow room closed in 2009 in preparation for an extensive renovation that started in 2011 . the restaurant reopened in october 2014 . the rockefeller family moved out of their offices in the ge building in 2014 due to rising rents . they re-settled in less expensive offices on 49th street , near their old headquarters . the next year , in july 2015 , the ge building was renamed after comcast , the parent company of nbcuniversal .