the kingdom of travancore malayalam : തിരുവിതാംകൂർ/ tamil : திருவிதாங்கூர் ) , also known as the kingdom of thiruvithamkoor , was an indian kingdom from c . 1729 until 1949 . it was ruled by the travancore royal family from padmanabhapuram , and later thiruvananthapuram . at its zenith , the kingdom covered most of modern-day southern kerala , parts of central kerala , and the southernmost part of modern-day tamil nadu ( kanyakumari district ) with the thachudaya kaimal 's enclave of irinjalakuda koodalmanikyam temple in the neighbouring kingdom of cochin . british archives the official flag of the state was red with a dextrally-coiled silver shankha ( turbinella pyrum ) at its center . the coat of arms had two elephants standing on the left and right with the conch shell ( turbinella pyrum ) in the center . the ribbon ( white ) with black devanagari script . king marthanda varma inherited the small feudal state of venad in 1723 and built it into travancore , one of the most powerful kingdoms in south india . marthanda varma led the travancore forces during the travancore-dutch war of 1739–46 , which culminated in the battle of colachel . the defeat of the dutch by travancore is considered the earliest example of an organised power from asia overcoming european military technology and tactics . marthanda varma went on to conquer most of the petty principalities of the native rulers . in the early 19th century , the kingdom became a princely state of the british empire . the travancore government took many progressive steps on the socio-economic front and during the reign of maharajah sri chithira thirunal balarama varma , travancore became a prosperous modern princely state in british raj , with reputed achievements in education , political administration , public work , and social reforms . '' travancore . '' encyclopædia britannica . encyclopædia britannica online . encyclopædia britannica inc . , 2011 . web . 11 november 2011 . chandra mallampalli , christians and public life in colonial south india , 1863–1937 : contending with marginality , routledgecurzon , 2004 , p . 30 in 1903–1904 the total revenue of the state was rs.1,02,01,900 .