intensive agriculture , also known as intensive farming ( as opposed to extensive farming ) and industrial agriculture , is a type of agriculture , both of crop plants and of animals , with higher levels of input and output per unit of agricultural land area . it is characterized by a low fallow ratio , higher use of inputs such as capital and labour , and higher crop yields per unit land area . most commerce agriculture is intensive in one or more ways . forms that rely heavily on industrial methods are often called industrial agriculture , which is characterised by innovations designed to increase yield . techniques include planting multiple crops per year , reducing the frequency of fallow years , and improving cultivars . it also involves increased use of fertilizers , plant growth regulators , and pesticides and mechanised agriculture , controlled by increased and more detailed analysis of growing conditions , including weather , soil , water , weeds , and pests . intensive farms are widespread in developed nations and increasingly prevalent worldwide . most of the meat , dairy products , eggs , fruits , and vegetables available in supermarkets are produced by such farms . some intensive farms can use sustainable methods , although this may necessitate higher inputs of labor or lower yields . sustainably increasing agricultural productivity , especially on smallholdings , is an important way of decreasing the amount of land needed for farming and slowing environmental degradation through processes like deforestation . since climate change and agriculture , project drawdown described '' sustainable intensification for smallholders '' an important method for climate change mitigation . intensive animal farming involves large numbers of animals raised on limited land , for example by rotational grazing , or in the western world sometimes as concentrated animal feeding operations . these methods increase the yields of food and fiber per acre as compared to extensive animal husbandry ; concentrated feed is brought to seldom-moved animals , or with rotational grazing the animals are repeatedly moved to fresh forage .