ancient greek philosophy arose in the 6th century bc , at a time when the inhabitants of ancient greece were struggling to repel devastating invasions from the east . greek philosophy continued throughout the hellenistic period and the period in which greece and most greek-inhabited lands were part of the roman empire . philosophy was used to make sense out of the world using reason . it dealt with a wide variety of subjects , including astronomy , epistemology , mathematics , political philosophy , ethics , metaphysics , ontology , logic , biology , rhetoric and aesthetics . greek philosophy has influenced much of western culture since its inception . alfred north whitehead once noted : '' the safest general characterization of the western philosophy is that it consists of a series of footnotes to plato '' . alfred north whitehead ( 1929 ) , process and reality , part ii , chap . i , sect . i . clear , unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient greek and hellenistic philosophers to roman philosophy , early islamic philosophy , medieval scholasticism , the european renaissance and the age of enlightenment . kevin scharp ( department of philosophy , ohio state university ) – diagrams . greek philosophy was influenced to some extent by the older wisdom literature and mythological cosmogony of the ancient near east , though the extent of this influence is debated . the classicist martin litchfield west states , '' contact with oriental cosmology and theology helped to liberate the pre-socratic philosophy imagination ; it certainly gave them many suggestive ideas . but they taught themselves to reason . philosophy as we understand it is a greek creation '' . subsequent philosophic tradition was so influenced by socrates as presented by plato that it is conventional to refer to philosophy developed prior to socrates as pre-socratic philosophy . the periods following this , up to and after the wars of alexander the great , are those of '' classical greek '' and '' hellenistic philosophy '' , respectively .