cosmetics are a category of health and beauty products that are used to care for the face and body , or used to accentuate or change a person 's appearance . though cosmetics are commonly thought of as only makeup used to alter a person 's appearance , cosmetics can also refer to a number of products used to care for the skin and the body , as well as those used to add fragrance to it . there are a large number of cosmetics available under these various categories , each designed for different purposes and featuring different characteristics . cosmetics are widely used and accepted in many different cultures . the popularity of cosmetics can be attributed to the creative self-expression and self-identity aspect . makeup and cosmetics can be used to subtly enhance natural features or create a brand new , out-of-this-world look . the cosmetic and makeup industry is worth billions of dollars and continues to increase due to the growing popularity and acceptance of makeup and cosmetics . cosmetics are constituted from a mixture of chemical compounds derived from either natural sources or synthetically created ones . schneider , günther et al ( 2005 ) . '' skin cosmetics '' in ullmann 's encyclopedia of industrial chemistry , wiley-vch , weinheim . cosmetics designed for skin care can be used to cleanse , exfoliate and protect the skin , as well as replenishing it , through the use of cleansers , toners , serums , moisturizers , and balms ; cosmetics designed for more general personal care , such as shampoo and body wash , can be used to cleanse the body ; cosmetics designed to enhance one 's appearance ( makeup ) can be used to conceal blemishes , enhance one 's natural features ( such as the eyebrows and eyelashes ) , add color to a person 's face and , in the case of more extreme forms of makeup used for performances , fashion shows and people in costume , can be used to change the appearance of the face entirely to resemble a different person , creature or object . cosmetics can also be designed to add fragrance to the body . though the legal definition of cosmetics in most countries is broader , in some western countries , cosmetics are commonly taken to mean only makeup products , such as lipstick , mascara , eye shadow , foundation , blush , highlighter , bronzer , and several other product types . in the united states , the food and drug administration ( fda ) , which regulates cosmetics , defines cosmetics as products '' intended to be applied to the human body for cleansing , beautifying , promoting attractiveness , or altering the appearance without affecting the body 's structure or functions '' . this broad definition includes any material intended for use as an ingredient of a cosmetic product , with the fda specifically excluding pure soap from this category .