in finance , an exchange rate is the rate at which one national currency will be exchanged for another . it is also regarded as the value of one country 's currency in relation to another currency . for example , an interbank exchange rate of 114 japanese yen to the united states dollar means that ¥114 will be exchanged for us 1 or that us 1 will be exchanged for ¥114 . in this case it is said that the price of a dollar in relation to yen is ¥114 , or equivalently that the price of a yen in relation to dollars is 1/114 . each country determines the exchange rate regime that will apply to its currency . for example , a currency may be floating , pegged ( fixed ) , or a hybrid . governments can impose certain limits and controls on exchange rates . in floating exchange rate regimes , exchange rates are determined in the foreign exchange market , the economist – guide to the financial markets ( pdf ) which is open to a wide range of different types of buyers and sellers , and where currency trading is continuous : 24 hours a day except weekends ( i.e . trading from 20:15 gmt on sunday until 22:00 gmt friday ) . the spot exchange rate is the current exchange rate , while the forward exchange rate is an exchange rate that is quoted and traded today but for delivery and payment on a specific future date . in the retail currency exchange market , different buying and selling rates will be quoted by money dealers . most trades are to or from the local currency . the buying rate is the rate at which money dealers will buy foreign currency , and the selling rate is the rate at which they will sell that currency . the quoted rates will incorporate an allowance for a dealer 's margin ( or profit ) in trading , or else the margin may be recovered in the form of a commission or in some other way . different rates may also be quoted for cash , a documentary transaction or for electronic transfers . the higher rate on documentary transactions has been justified as compensating for the additional time and cost of clearing the document . on the other hand , cash is available for resale immediately , but incurs security , storage , and transportation costs , and the cost of tying up capital in a stock of banknotes ( bills ) .