rainbow ( also known as ritchie blackmore 's rainbow or blackmore 's rainbow ) are a british rock band , formed in 1975 by guitarist ritchie blackmore . they were originally established with ronnie james dio 's american rock band elf , but after their self-titled debut album , blackmore fired the backing members and continued with dio . rainbow recorded two more studio albums with dio—rising ( 1976 ) and long live rock ' n ' roll ( 1978 ) —before he left the band to join black sabbath in 1979 . rainbow 's early work primarily featured mystical lyrics with a neoclassical metal style , then went in a more pop-rock oriented direction following dio 's departure from the group . three british musicians joined in 1979—singer graham bonnet , keyboardist don airey and then-former deep purple bassist roger glover—and this line-up gave the band their commercial breakthrough with the single '' since you been gone '' from their fourth studio album down to earth . the band continued their success in the early 1980s with their next three albums difficult to cure ( 1981 ) , straight between the eyes ( 1982 ) and bent out of shape ( 1983 ) . after breaking up in 1984 , blackmore reformed rainbow in 1993 with a new lineup , which recorded their eighth and last studio album to date stranger in us all ( 1995 ) . blackmore 's change in direction , from rock to renaissance and medieval-influenced music , led to rainbow 's second dissolution in 1997 . he revived the band once again in 2015 , and they still perform live occasionally . over the years rainbow went through many personnel changes , with each studio album recorded with a different lineup , and leaving blackmore as the band 's only constant member . the singers joe lynn turner and doogie white followed bonnet , and numerous backing musicians have come and gone . in addition to blackmore , rainbow 's current lineup includes ronnie romero on vocals , jens johansson on keyboards , bob curiano on bass and david keith on drums . rainbow were ranked no . & nbsp ; 90 on vh1 's 100 greatest artists of hard rock . the band have sold over 28 million records worldwide .