grace communion international ( gci ) , formerly the worldwide church of god ( wcg ) ( still registered as worldwide church of god in the uk and some other regions ) and the radio church of god , is a christian denomination based in charlotte , north carolina , us , with the former mentioned organizations having had an often controversial influence on 20th-century religious broadcasting and publishing in the united states and europe . originally based in eugene , oregon , and formerly named the radio church of god , its parent wcg organization was founded in 1934 by televangelist herbert w . armstrong as a radio ministry that promoted a strict , minimalist doctrine . armstrong prophesied that the world might end in 1975 , observed a saturday sabbath , forbade medical interventions , and often required three tithes . the radio ministry initially spread armstrong 's prophecies and interpretations of the bible via its national radio broadcast , the world tomorrow , which later became a television program as well . after a few years on the air , armstrong had developed a small following , so the church started publishing a free magazine , the plain truth , to supplement armstrong 's message in print for its radio audience . in 1947 , the church relocated its headquarters to ambassador college in pasadena , california , also founded by armstrong , and in 1968 , the movement was renamed the worldwide church of god ( wcg ) . under its wcg incarnation , the church developed a reputation as a '' doomsday cult '' . within a few years of armstrong 's death in 1986 , joseph w . tkach , armstrong 's chosen successor , along with other leading ministers came to the conclusion that a great many of their doctrines were not biblical . as a result , many members and ministers left and formed other churches that conformed to many of the teachings of armstrong . in 2009 , the church changed its name from the worldwide church of god to its current name . the gci is a member of the national association of evangelicals , and has 50,000 members in 900 congregations in about 100 countries .