the songwriters hall of fame ( shof ) is an american institution founded in 1969 by songwriter johnny mercer , music publisher/songwriter abe olman and publisher/executive howie richmond to honor those whose work represents and maintains the heritage and legacy of a spectrum of the most beloved english language songs from the world 's popular music songbook . it not only celebrates these established songwriters , but is also involved in the development of new english language songwriting talent through workshops , showcases and scholarships . there are many programs designed to teach and discover new english language songwriters . nile rodgers serves as the organization 's chairman . the hall of fame has only existed since 2010 , when it was first put on display online inside the grammy museum at l.a . live in los angeles . until construction of the basement installation at the brill building in new york is completed , the hall has no permanent place of residence , and because the awards are not televised , there would be no other digital recording of the event for posterity . there are numerous examples of collaborating songwriters being inducted in unison , with each person being considered a separate entrant . the inaugural year featured 120 inductees , many of whom had a professional partnership , such as rodgers and hammerstein . burt bacharach and hal david followed in 1972 . betty comden and adolph green were selected in 1980 , and lieber and stoller were inducted in 1985 . john lennon and paul mccartney were inducted in 1989 along with gerry goffin and carole king as well as barry mann and cynthia weil . motown 's holland-dozier-holland team were honored the following year . elton john and bernie taupin were among those chosen in 1992 , and the pop music group the bee gees had all three brothers inducted in 1994 . in 1995 , bob gaudio and bob crewe as well as gamble and huff were inducted . john denver and ringo starr was inducted in 1996 . the eagles ' glenn frey and don henley were co-inductees in 2000 . queen was the first rock band to have all their band members inducted in 2003 . five members of earth , wind & fire were in the class of 2010 and four members of kool and the gang were honored in 2018 . through 2019 , 461 individuals were inducted into the shof . due to the covid-19 pandemic , the 2020 songwriters hall of fame induction ceremony was postponed until 2021 . the songwriters hall of fame president and ceo , linda moran , chose to move the event so that a proper celebration could take place . new 2020 inductees would include mariah carey , chad hugo , the isley brothers , annie lennox , steve miller , rick nowels , william '' mickey '' stevenson , dave stewart and pharrell williams . additionally , jody gerson of universal music group will be given the abe olman publisher award and paul williams is set to receive the johnny mercer award .