trepanning , also known as trepanation , trephination , trephining or making a burr hole ( the verb trepan derives from old french from medieval latin trepanum from greek trypanon , literally '' borer , auger '' ) . henry liddell ; scott , robert ; a greek–english lexicon at the perseus project . is a surgical intervention in which a hole is drilled or scraped into the human skull . the intentional perforation of the cranium exposes the dura mater to treat health problems related to intracranial diseases or release pressured blood buildup from an injury . it may also refer to any '' burr '' hole created through other body surfaces , including nail beds . a trephine is an instrument used for cutting out a round piece of skull bone to relieve pressure beneath a surface . in ancient times , holes were drilled into a person who was behaving in what was considered an abnormal way to let out what people believed were evil spirits . nolen-hoeksema , abnormal psychology , 6e , mcgraw-hill education , 2014 evidence of trepanation has been found in prehistoric human remains from neolithic times onward . the bone that was trepanned was kept by the prehistoric people and may have been worn as a charm to keep evil spirits away . evidence also suggests that trepanation was primitive emergency surgery after head wounds to remove shattered bits of bone from a fractured skull and clean out the blood that often pools under the skull after a blow to the head . hunting accidents , falls , wild animals , and weapons such as clubs or spears could have caused such injuries . trepanations appear to have been most common in areas where weapons that could produce skull fractures were used . the primary theories for the practice of trepanation in ancient times include spiritual purposes and treatment for epilepsy , headache , head wound , and mental disorders . there is some contemporary use of the term . in modern eye surgery , a trephine instrument is used in cornea transplant . the procedure of drilling a hole through a fingernail or toenail is also known as trephination . it is performed by a physician or surgeon to relieve the pain associated with a subungual hematoma ( blood under the nail ) ; a small amount of blood is expressed through the hole and the pain associated with the pressure is partially alleviated . similarly , in abdominal surgery , a trephine incision is when a small disc of abdominal skin is excised to accommodate a stoma . although the abdominal wall does not contain bone , the use of the word 'trephine ' in this context may relate to the round excised area of skin being similar in shape to a burr hole .