guerrilla marketing is an advertising strategy in which a company uses surprise and/or unconventional interactions in order to promote a product or service . it is a type of publicity . the term was popularized by jay conrad levinson 's 1984 book guerrilla marketing . guerrilla marketing uses multiple techniques and practices in order to establish direct contact with the customers . bernard cova & marcel saucet , '' the secret lives of unconventional campaigns : street marketing on the fringe '' , journal of marketing communications , 2014 ; jay conrad levinson , 1984 one of the goals of this interaction is to cause an emotional reaction in the clients , and the ultimate goal of marketing is to get people to remember products or brands in a different way than they are accustomed to . as traditional advertising media channelssuch as print , radio , television , and direct mail lose popularity , marketers and advertisers have to find new strategies to get their commercial messages to the consumer . guerrilla marketing focuses on taking the consumer by surprise to make a big impression about the product or brand . what is guerrilla marketing , 2015 this in turn creates buzz about the product being marketed . it is a way of advertising that increases consumers ' engagement with the product or service , and is designed to create a memorable experience . by creating a memorable experience , it also increases the likelihood that a consumer , or someone who interacted with the campaign , will tell their friends about the product . thus , via word of mouth , the product or service being advertised reaches more people than initially anticipated . guerrilla marketing is relatively inexpensive , and focuses more on reach rather than frequency . for guerrilla campaigns to be successful , companies do n't need to spend large amounts , they just need to have imagination , energy and time . bourn , 2009 therefore , it has the potential to be effective for small businesses , especially if they are competing against bigger companies . the message to consumers is often designed to be clear and concise . this type of marketing also works on the unconscious mind , as purchasing decisions are often made by the unconscious mind . to keep the product or service in the unconscious mind requires repetition , so if a buzz is created around a product , and it is shared amongst friends , it enables repetition . bourn , 2009