the clayton–bulwer treaty was a treaty signed in 1850 between the united states and the united kingdom . the treaty was negotiated by john m . clayton and sir henry bulwer , amidst growing tensions between the two nations over central america , a region where the british had traditionally held strong influence but also saw increasing american expansion into the area . the treaty proved instrumental in preventing the outbreak of war between the two nations-resolving tensions over american plans to construct a nicaragua canal that would connect the pacific and the atlantic . there were three main provisions in the treaty : neither nation would build such a canal without the consent and cooperation of the other ; neither would fortify or found new colonies in the region ; when a canal was built , both powers would guarantee that it would be available on a neutral basis for all shipping . construction on the proposed canal never came to fruition , although the treaty remained in effect until 1901 . britain had indefinite territorial claims in three regions : british honduras ( modern-day belize ) , the mosquito coast ( part of modern-day nicaragua and honduras ) and the bay islands ( now part of modern-day honduras ) . the united states , while not making any territorial claims , held in reserve , ready for ratification , treaties with nicaragua and honduras which gave the united states a certain diplomatic advantage with which to balance the pre-eminent british influence in the region . with it soon becoming apparent to american negotiators that agreement on these points would be impossible and agreement on the canal question was possible , the latter was put into the foreground during the negotiations . van alstyne , 1939 by 1857 , however , the british had ended their diplomatic opposition to american western expansion , while steadfastly maintaining their rights to a potential nicaraguan canal . richard w . van alstyne , '' anglo-american relations , 1853–1857 . '' american historical review 42.3 ( 1937 ) : 491-500 . online