image : napalm.jpg thumb an american aircraft drops napalm on viet cong positions in 1965 . image : luftwaffe 1kg incendiary bomb.jpg thumb right a german world war ii incendiary bomb remnant firebombing is a bombing technique designed to damage a target , generally an urban area , through the use of fire , caused by incendiary devices , rather than from the blast effect of large bombs . in popular usage , any act in which an incendiary device is used to initiate a fire is often described as a '' firebombing '' . this article is concerned with aerial incendiary bombing as a military tactic ; for non-military ( almost always criminal ) acts , see arson . although simple incendiary bombs have been used to destroy buildings since the start of gunpowder warfare , world war i saw the first use of strategic bombing from the air to damage the morale and economy of the enemy , such as the german zeppelin air raids conducted on london during the great war . the chinese wartime capital of chongqing was firebombed by the imperial japanese starting in early 1939 . london , coventry , and many other british cities were firebombed during the blitz by germany . most large german cities were extensively firebombed starting in 1942 , and almost air raids on japan during the last six months of world war ii . this technique makes use of small incendiary bombs ( possibly delivered by a cluster bomb such as the molotov bread basket ) . if a fire catches , it could spread , taking in adjacent buildings that would have been largely unaffected by a high explosive bomb . this is a more effective use of the payload that a bomber could carry . the use of incendiaries alone does not generally start uncontrollable fires where the targets are roofed with nonflammable materials such as tiles or slates . the use of a mixture of bombers carrying high explosive bombs , such as the british blockbuster bombs , which blew out windows and roofs and exposed the interior of buildings to the incendiary bombs , is much more effective . alternatively , a preliminary bombing with conventional bombs can be followed by subsequent attacks by incendiary carrying bombers .