in terrestrial zoology , the megafauna ( from greek μέγας megas '' large '' and new latin fauna '' animal life '' ) comprises the large or giant animals of an area , habitat , or geological period . the most common thresholds used are weight over or see page 17 ( i.e . , having a mass comparable to or larger than a human ) or over a tonne , ( i.e . , having a mass comparable to or larger than an ox ) . the first of these include many species not popularly thought of as overly large , such as white-tailed deer and red kangaroo . in practice , the most common usage encountered in academic and popular writing describes land mammals roughly larger than a human that are not ( solely ) domesticated . the term is especially associated with the pleistocene megafauna – the land animals often larger than modern counterparts considered archetypical of the last ice age , such as mammoths , the majority of which in northern eurasia , the americas and australia became extinct within the last forty thousand years . ice age animals . illinois state museum among living animals , the term megafauna is most commonly used for the largest extant terrestrial mammals , which are elephants , giraffes , hippopotamuses , rhinoceroses , and large bovines . of these five categories of large herbivores , only bovines are presently found outside of africa and southern asia , but all the others were formerly more wide-ranging . megafaunal species may be categorized according to their dietary type : megaherbivores ( e.g . , elephants ) , megacarnivores ( e.g . , lions ) , and , more rarely , megaomnivores ( e.g . , bears ) . other common uses are for giant aquatic species , especially whales , any of the larger wild or domesticated land animals such as larger antelope and cattle , as well as dinosaurs and other extinct giant reptilians . the term megafauna is very rarely used to describe invertebrates , though it has occasionally been used for some species of extinct invertebrates that were much larger than all similar invertebrate species alive today , for example meganisoptera of the carboniferous period .