mahamaham , also known as mahamagham or mamangam , is a hindu festival celebrated every 12 years in the mahamaham tank located in the south indian town of kumbakonam in tamil nadu , india . this 20-acre square tank surrounded by shiva mandapams is believed by tamil hindus to be ancient , and the holy confluence of nine indian river goddesses : ganga , yamuna , sarasvati , narmada , godavari , krishna , tungabhadra , kaveri , and sarayu , states diana eck – a professor of comparative religion and indian studies . on the day of the mahamaham festival , the river goddesses and shiva gather here to rejuvenate their waters , according to a legend in the periya purana . the hindus consider taking a pilgrimage and holy dip at the mahamaham tirtha on the day of mahamaham festival as sacred . the event attracts chariot processions , street fairs and classical dance performances in temple mandapas . the 12-year cycle mahamaham festival in tamil nadu is observed in the hindu calendar month of magha , and is a symbolic equivalent of the kumbh mela in prayag , uttar pradesh . the mahamaham festival – also referred to as the maha magam festival – and the holy dip tradition of the south indian hindus was documented by the british colonial era writers in the 19th-century . see e.g . indian antiquary ( may 1873 ) , volume 2 , pages 151-152 , harvard university archives the 2016 mahamaham was celebrated on 22 february 2016 with over a million people from various places taking the holy dip in the mahamaham tank . on 25 february 1955 , the festival attracted about a million hindu bathers in a single day , where the festival is observed according to the tamil hindu calendar approximately once every 12 years ( georgian calendar ) . – a history of dharmasastra v 5.1 , pv kane ( 1958 ) , page 375 the festival with its dip-in-the-tank-waters tradition extends over 10 days ( brahmothsavam ) . the 10-day festivities are also observed with lesser crowds in the magha month ( about february ) every year between the 12-year maha ( major ) cycle . in the interim years , the event is called the masi-maham festival .