evolutionary economics is part of mainstream economics as well as a heterodox school of economic thought that is inspired by evolutionary biology . much like mainstream economics , it stresses complex interdependency , competition , growth , structural change , and resource constraints but differs in the approaches which are used to analyze these phenomena . geoffrey hodgson ( 1993 ) economics and evolution : bringing life back into economics , cambridge and university of michigan press . description and chapter-link preview . evolutionary economics deals with the study of processes that transform economy for firms , institutions , industries , employment , production , trade and growth within , through the actions of diverse agents from experience and interactions , using evolutionary methodology . evolutionary economics analyses the unleashing of a process of technological and institutional innovation by generating and testing a diversity of ideas which discover and accumulate more survival value for the costs incurred than competing alternatives . the evidence suggests that it could be adaptive efficiency that defines economic efficiency . mainstream economic reasoning begins with the postulates of scarcity and rational agents ( that is , agents modeled as maximizing their individual welfare ) , with the '' rational choice '' for any agent being a straightforward exercise in mathematical optimization . there has been renewed interest in treating economic systems as evolutionary systems in the developing field of complexity economics . evolutionary economics does not take the characteristics of either the objects of choice or of the decision-maker as fixed . rather , its focus is on the non-equilibrium processes that transform the economy from within and their implications . the processes in turn emerge from actions of diverse agents with bounded rationality who may learn from experience and interactions and whose differences contribute to the change . the subject draws more recently on evolutionary game theory daniel friedman ( 1998 ) . '' on economic applications of evolutionary game theory , '' journal of evolutionary economics , 8 ( 1 ) , pp . 15-43 . and on the evolutionary methodology of charles darwin and the non-equilibrium economics principle of circular and cumulative causation . it is naturalistic in purging earlier notions of economic change as teleology or necessarily improving the human condition . ulrich witt ( 2008 ) . '' evolutionary economics . '' the new palgrave dictionary of economics , 2nd edition , v . 3 , pp . 67-68 abstract . a different approach is to apply evolutionary psychology principles to economics which is argued to explain problems such as inconsistencies and biases in rational choice theory . basic economic concepts such as utility may be better viewed as due to preferences that maximized evolutionary fitness in the ancestral environment but not necessarily in the current one . paul h . rubin and c . monica capra . the evolutionary psychology of economics . in