the adam–god doctrine ( or adam–god theory ) was a theological idea taught in mid-19th century mormonism by brigham young , a president of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) . although the doctrine is rejected by the lds church today , it is still an accepted part of the modern theology of some mormon fundamentalism . according to young , he was taught by joseph smith minutes of meeting , at historian 's office ; great salt lake city ; 7 p.m . april 4 , 1860 published in the office journal of brigham young 1858-1863 , appendix b . '' it was joseph 's doctrine that adam was god & c when in luke johnson 's '' . that adam is '' our father and our god , and the only god with whom we have to do . '' ( statement given in the general conference of the lds church on april 9 , 1852 ) . according to the doctrine , adam was once a mortal man who became resurrected and exalted . from another planet , he then came as michael to form earth . journal of discourses 7:285–90 . adam then was given a physical body and a spouse , eve , where they became mortal by eating the forbidden fruit in the garden of eden . after bearing mortal children and establishing the human race , adam and eve returned to their heavenly thrones , where adam serves as god and is the heavenly father of humankind . later , adam returned to the earth to the ancient prophets and to become the literal father of jesus . during the 19th century and the early 20th century , the adam–god doctrine was featured as part of the church 's endowment ceremony . however , the doctrine was startling to most members when it was introduced and remained controversial . most mormons and some breakoff groups , the most notable being apostle orson pratt , rejected the doctrine in favor of more traditional biblical adam and eve theory . soon after brigham young died , the adam–god doctrine fell out of favor within the lds church and was replaced by a theology more similar to pratt 's , as expounded by turn-of-the century mormon theologians james e . talmage , b . h . roberts , and john a . widtsoe . in 1976 , church president spencer w . kimball stated the lds church does not support the doctrine . most mormons accept adam as '' the ancient of days , '' '' father of all , '' doctrine and covenants 138:38–39 . and '' michael the archangel '' but do not recognize him as being '' god the father . ''