a corps area was a geographically-based organizational structure ( military district ) of the united states army used to accomplish administrative , training and tactical tasks from 1920 to 1942 . each corps area included divisions of the regular army , organized reserve and national guard of the united states . developed as a result of serious mobilization problems during world war i , this organization provided a framework to rapidly expand the army in time of war or national emergency such as the great depression . the nine corps areas , created by the war plans division under authority of united states war department general order no . 50 on 20 august 1920 , had identical responsibilities for providing peacetime administrative and logistical support to the army 's mobile units as was provided by the six territorial '' departments '' they replaced . in addition , the corps areas took on the responsibilities for post and installation support units ( '' zone of the interior '' units ) created during world war i . corps areas had the added responsibility for planning and implementing mobilization plans for all regular army , national guard , and organized reserve mobile units in their respective geographic areas ; the development and administration of hundreds of new organized reserve and reserve officers training corps ( rotc ) units ; and managing the personnel records for thousands of reserve officers , enlisted personnel , rotc cadets , and citizens military training camp ( cmtc ) candidates . the composition of the corps areas divided the united states geographically by state lines and population density into nine multi-state area commands roughly equal in population . each corps area was responsible for organizing two tactical corps consisting of three infantry divisions each . each corps area also had responsibility for organizing various other field army , general headquarters reserve , zone of the interior ( later designated as corps area service command ) , and communications zone units . the first , second , third , fourth , eighth , and ninth corps areas also organized units to man various fixed coastal defenses . the corps areas were further grouped into three army areas of two field armies each .