in theoretical physics , particularly in discussions of gravitation theories , mach 's principle ( or mach 's conjecture hans christian von bayer , the fermi solution : essays on science , courier dover publications ( 2001 ) , , page 79 . ) is the name given by einstein to an imprecise hypothesis often credited to the physicist and philosopher ernst mach . the purpose of the hypothesis was to attempt to explain how rotating objects maintain a frame of reference , such as gyroscopes and spinning celestial bodies . the idea is that the existence of absolute rotation ( the distinction of local inertial frames vs . rotating reference frames ) is determined by the large-scale distribution of matter , as exemplified by this anecdote : you are standing in a field looking at the stars . your arms are resting freely at your side , and you see that the distant stars are not moving . now start spinning . the stars are whirling around you and your arms are pulled away from your body . why should your arms be pulled away when the stars are whirling ? why should they be dangling freely when the stars do n't move ? mach 's principle says that this is not a coincidence—that there is a physical law that relates the motion of the distant stars to the local inertial frame . if you see all the stars whirling around you , mach suggests that there is some physical law which would make it so you would feel a centrifugal force . there are a number of rival formulations of the principle . it is often stated in vague ways , like '' mass out there influences inertia here '' . a very general statement of mach 's principle is '' local physical laws are determined by the large-scale structure of the universe '' . this concept was a guiding factor in einstein 's development of the general theory of relativity . einstein realized that the overall distribution of matter would determine the metric tensor , which tells you which frame is rotationally stationary . frame-dragging and conservation of gravitational angular momentum makes this into a true statement in the general theory in certain solutions . but because the principle is so vague , many distinct statements can be ( and have been ) made that would qualify as a mach principle , and some of these are false . the gödel metric is a solution of the field equations that is designed to disobey mach 's principle in the worst possible way . in this example , the distant stars seem to be revolving faster and faster as one moves further away . this example does n't completely settle the question , because it has closed timelike curves .