john of brienne 1170 – 27 march 1237 ) , also known as john i , was king of jerusalem from 1210 to 1225 and latin emperor of constantinople from 1229 to 1237 . he was the youngest son of erard ii of brienne , a wealthy nobleman in champagne . john , originally destined for an ecclesiastical career , became a knight and owned small estates in champagne around 1200 . after the death of his brother , walter iii , he ruled the county of brienne on behalf of his minor nephew walter iv ( who lived in southern italy ) . the barons of the kingdom of jerusalem proposed that john marry their queen , maria . with the consent of philip ii of france and pope innocent iii , he left france for the holy land and married the queen ; the couple were crowned in 1210 . after maria 's death in 1212 john administered the kingdom as regent for their infant daughter , isabella ii ; an influential lord , john of ibelin , attempted to depose him . john was a leader of the fifth crusade . although his claim of supreme command of the crusader army was never unanimously acknowledged , his right to rule damietta ( in egypt ) was confirmed shortly after the town fell to the crusaders in 1219 . he claimed the armenian kingdom of cilicia on behalf of his second wife , stephanie , in 1220 . after stephanie and their infant son died that year , john returned to egypt . the fifth crusade ended in failure ( including the recovery of damietta by the egyptians ) in 1221 . john was the first king of jerusalem to visit europe ( italy , france , england , león , castile and germany ) to seek assistance for the holy land . he gave his daughter in marriage to holy roman emperor frederick ii in 1225 , and frederick ended john 's rule of the kingdom of jerusalem . although the popes tried to persuade frederick to restore the kingdom to john , the jerusalemite barons regarded frederick as their lawful ruler . john administered papal domains in tuscany , became the podestà of perugia and was a commander of pope gregory ix 's army during gregory 's war against frederick in 1228 and 1229 . he was elected emperor in 1229 as the senior co-ruler ( with baldwin ii ) of the latin empire , and was crowned in constantinople in 1231 . john iii vatatzes , emperor of nicaea , and ivan asen ii of bulgaria occupied the last latin territories in thrace and asia minor , besieging constantinople in early 1235 . john directed the defence of his capital during the months-long siege , with the besiegers withdrawing only after geoffrey ii of achaea and united fleets from italian towns defeated their fleet in 1236 . the following year , john died as a franciscan friar .