goodbye , columbus is a 1959 collection of fiction by the american novelist philip roth , comprising the title novella '' goodbye , columbus '' —which first appeared in the paris review—and five short stories . it was his first book and was published by houghton mifflin . in addition to the title novella , set in short hills , new jersey , goodbye , columbus contains the five short stories '' the conversion of the jews '' , '' defender of the faith '' , '' epstein '' , '' you ca n't tell a man by the song he sings '' , and '' eli , the fanatic '' . each story deals with the concerns of second and third-generation assimilated american jews as they leave the ethnic ghettos of their parents and grandparents and go on to college , to white-collar professions , and to life in the suburbs . the book was a critical success for roth and won the 1960 u.s . national book award for fiction . '' national book awards – 1960 '' . retrieved 2012-03-30 . there is a link there to roth 's acceptance speech . the national book awards blog for the 50th anniversary of goodbye , columbus is essays by five writers about the book . the annual awards are made by the national book foundation . the book was not without controversy , as people within the jewish community took issue with roth 's less than flattering portrayal of some characters . zucker , david j . '' roth , rushdie , and rage : religious reactions to portnoy and the verses . '' bnet . 2008 . 17 july 2010 . the short story defender of the faith , about a jewish sergeant who is exploited by three shirking , coreligionist draftees , drew particular ire . when roth in 1962 appeared on a panel alongside the distinguished black novelist ralph ellison to discuss minority representation in literature , the questions directed at him became denunciations . kaplan , justin ( september 25 , 1988 ) . '' play it again , nathan '' . the new york times . many accused roth of being a self-hating jew , a label that stuck with him for years . '' profile : philip roth : literary hit man with a 9/11 bullet in his gun . '' the times . 19 september 2004 . 17 july 2010 . the title novella was made into the 1969 film goodbye , columbus , starring ali macgraw and richard benjamin .