thumb thumb in music theory , the wolf fifth ( sometimes also called procrustean fifth , or imperfect fifth ) a.l . leigh silver ( 1971 ) , p.354 paul , oscar ( 1885 ) . a manual of harmony for use in music-schools and seminaries and for self-instruction , p.165 . theodore baker , trans . g . schirmer . is a particularly dissonant musical interval spanning seven semitones . strictly , the term refers to an interval produced by a specific tuning system , widely used in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries : the quarter-comma meantone temperament . the wolf fifth more broadly , it is also used to refer to similar intervals produced by other tuning systems , including most meantone temperaments . when the twelve notes within the octave of a chromatic scale are tuned using the quarter-comma mean-tone systems of temperament , one of the twelve intervals spanning seven semitones ( classified as a diminished sixth ) turns out to be much wider than the others ( classified as perfect fifths ) . in mean-tone systems , this interval is usually from c to a or from g to e but can be moved in either direction to favor certain groups of keys . the eleven perfect fifths sound almost perfectly consonant . conversely , the diminished sixth is severely dissonant and seems to howl like a wolf , because of a phenomenon called beating . since the diminished sixth is meant to be enharmonically equivalent to a perfect fifth , this anomalous interval has come to be called the wolf fifth . besides the above-mentioned quarter comma meantone , other tuning systems may produce severely dissonant diminished sixths . conversely , in 12-tone equal temperament , which is currently the most commonly used tuning system , the diminished sixth is not a wolf fifth , as it has exactly the same size as a perfect fifth . by extension , any interval which is perceived as severely dissonant and may be regarded as howling like a wolf may be called a wolf interval . for instance , in quarter comma meantone , the augmented second , augmented third , augmented fifth , diminished fourth and diminished seventh may be considered wolf intervals , as their size significantly deviates from the size of the corresponding justly tuned interval ( see quarter comma meantone size of intervals ) .