was born on december 30 , 1937 , in new york city to parents carl and mary harford . he spent his childhood in st . louis , missouri , where he was exposed to the influence that shaped much of his career and music : the mississippi river . from the time he got his first job on the river , at age 16 , hartford was on , around , or singing about the river . his early musical influences came from the broadcasts of the grand ole opry , and included earl scruggs , nominal inventor of the three-finger bluegrass style of banjo playing . hartford said often that the first time he heard earl scruggs pick the banjo changed his life . by age 13 , hartford was an accomplished old-time fiddler and banjo player , and he soon learned to play guitar and mandolin as well . hartford formed his first bluegrass band while attending john burroughs school , a local private high school . after high school , he enrolled at washington university in st . louis , completed four years of a commercial arts program and dropped out to focus on music ; however , he did receive a degree in 1960 . he immersed himself in the local music scene , working as a dj , playing in bands , and occasionally recording singles for local labels . in 1965 , he moved to nashville , tennessee , the center of the country music industry . in 1966 , he signed with rca victor and produced his first album , looks at life , in the same year . in 1967 , hartford 's second album earthwords & music spawned his first major songwriting hit , '' gentle on my mind '' . his recording of the song was only a modest success , but it caught the notice of glen campbell , who recorded his own version , which gave the song much wider publication . at the 1968 grammys , the song netted four awards , two of which went to hartford . it became one of the most widely recorded country songs of all time , and the royalties it brought in allowed hartford great financial independence ; hartford later said that the song bought his freedom . hartford 's biography from his official site . as his popularity grew , he moved to the west coast , where he became a regular on the smothers brothers comedy hour ; other television appearances followed , as did recording appearances with several major country artists . hartford played banjo and sang the vocal harmonies on the guthrie thomas song , '' i 'll be lucky '' . he also played with the byrds on their album sweetheart of the rodeo . his success on the smothers brothers series was enough that hartford was offered the lead role in a tv detective series but he turned it down to move back to nashville and concentrate on music . he also was a regular on the glen campbell goodtime hour ( the banjo picker who would stand up from his seat in the audience to begin the theme music ) and the johnny cash show . in live performances , john hartford was a true one-man band ; he used several stringed instruments and a variety of props such as plywood squares and boards with sand and gravel for flatfoot dancing .