febrile seizures are due to fevers , usually those greater than . the cause of the fevers is often a viral illness . the likelihood of a febrile seizure is related to how high the temperature reaches . some feel that the rate of increase is not important while others feel the rate of increase is a risk factor . this latter position has not been proven . in children , illnesses that often cause a fever include otitis media and upper respiratory tract infection . other infections associated with febrile seizures include shigellosis , salmonellosis , and roseola . although the exact mechanism is unknown , it is speculated that these infections may affect the brain directly or via a neurotoxin leading to seizures . there is a small chance of a febrile seizure after certain vaccines . the risk is only slightly increased for a few days after receiving one of the implicated vaccines during the time when the child is likely to develop a fever as a natural immune response . implicated vaccines include : mmrv vaccine dtap-ipv/hib vaccine dpt vaccine , which is not used in north america anymore some versions of the pneumococcal vaccine some types of inactivated influenza vaccine it was previously thought that febrile seizures were more likely to occur with the combined mmrv vaccine , but recent studies have found there to be no significant increase . overall , febrile seizures triggered by vaccines are uncommon . children who have a genetic predisposition towards febrile seizures are more likely to have one after vaccination . the seizures occur , by definition , without an intracranial infection or metabolic problems . they run in families with reported family history in approximately 33 % of people . several genetic associations have been identified , including gefs+ and dravet syndrome . possible modes of inheritance for genetic predisposition to febrile seizures include autosomal dominance with reduced penetrance and polygene multifactorial inheritance . an association with iron deficiency has also been reported , particularly in the developing world .