the lincoln county war was an old west conflict between rival factions which began in 1878 in new mexico territory , the predecessor of the state of new mexico , and continued until 1881 . the feud became famous because of the participation of the criminal henry mccarty ( '' billy the kid '' ) . other notable participants included sheriff william j . brady , cattle rancher john chisum , lawyer and businessman alexander mcsween , james dolan and lawrence murphy . the conflict began between two factions competing for profits from dry goods and cattle interests in the county . the older , established faction was dominated by james dolan , who operated a dry goods monopoly through a general store referred to locally as “ the house ” . english-born john tunstall and his business partner alexander mcsween opened a competing store in 1876 , with backing from established cattleman john chisum . the two sides gathered lawmen , businessmen , tunstall ’ s ranch hands , and criminal gangs to their assistance . the dolan faction was allied with lincoln county sheriff brady and aided by the jesse evans gang . the tunstall-mcsween faction organized their own posse of armed men , known as the lincoln county regulators , and had their own lawmen consisting of town constable richard m . brewer and deputy us marshal robert widenmann . the conflict was marked by revenge killings , starting with the murder of tunstall by members of the evans gang . in revenge for this , the regulators killed sheriff brady and others in a series of incidents . further killings continued unabated for several months , climaxing in the battle of lincoln ( 1878 ) , a five-day gunfight and siege that resulted in the death of mcsween and the scattering of the regulators . pat garrett was named county sheriff in 1880 , and he hunted down billy the kid , killing two other former regulators in the process . the war was fictionalized by several hollywood movies , including sam peckinpah ’ s pat garrett and billy the kid in 1973 , the left handed gun in 1958 , john wayne ’ s chisum in 1970 , and young guns in 1988 . ron hansen ’ s novel the kid ( 2016 ) is also inspired by the lincoln county war .