sex in advertising is the use of sex appeal in advertising to help sell a particular product or service . according to research , sexually appealing imagery used for marketing does not need to pertain to the product or service in question . a few examples of sexually appealing imagery include nudity , pin-up models , and muscular men . '' sex sells '' became a controversial issue , with techniques for enlarging and titillating the audience challenging conventional moral standards . rodger streitmatter , sex sells ! : the media 's journey from repression to obsession ( basic books , 2004 ) . jessica dawn blair , et al . , '' ethics in advertising : sex sells , but should it ? . '' journal of legal , ethical and regulatory issues 9.1/2 ( 2006 ) : 109+ . in contemporary mainstream advertising ( e.g . , magazines , online , television ) , sex is present in promotional messages for a wide range of branded goods . ads often feature provocative images of well-defined women and men in revealing outfits and postures selling things such as clothing , alcohol , beauty products , and fragrances . advertisers such as calvin klein , victoria 's secret , and pepsi ( just to name a few ) use these images to cultivate a sexy media presence . also , sexual information is used to promote mainstream products not traditionally associated with sex . for example , dallas opera 's recent reversal of its declining ticket sales has been attributed to the marketing of the more lascivious parts of its performances . chism , 1999 the use of sex in advertising can be highly overt or extremely subtle and , on some level , subliminal . it ranges from relatively explicit displays of sexual acts and seductive behavior aimed at the viewer , to the use of double-meanings and underlying sexual references that are more subconscious . sex in advertising relies on evolutionary processes and varies in effectiveness depending on the culture and gender of the receiver . the use of sex in advertising has been criticized for its tendency to objectify the female body and emphasizing various stereotypes .