a ( 'occasion for war ' ) is an act or event that provokes or is used to justify war . a casus belli involves direct offenses or threats against the nation declaring the war , whereas a involves offenses or threats against its ally—usually one bound by a mutual defense pact . either may be considered an the term came into wide use in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries through the writings of hugo grotius ( 1653 ) , cornelius van bynkershoek ( 1707 ) , and jean-jacques burlamaqui ( 1732 ) , among others , and due to the rise of the political doctrine of jus ad bellum or '' just war theory '' . the term is also used informally to refer to any '' just cause '' a nation may claim for entering into a conflict . it is used retrospectively to describe situations that arose before the term came into wide use , as well as present-day situations , including those in which war has not been formally declared . in formally articulating a casus belli , a government typically lays out its reasons for going to war , its intended means of prosecuting the war , and the steps that others might take to dissuade it from going to war . it attempts to demonstrate that it is going to war only as a last resort ( ultima ratio ) and that it has '' just cause '' for doing so . modern international law recognizes only three lawful justifications for waging war : self-defense , defense of an ally required by the terms of a treaty , and approval by the united nations . proschema ( plural proschemata ) is the equivalent greek term , first popularized by thucydides in his history of the peloponnesian war . the proschemata are the stated reasons for waging war , which may or may not be the same as the real reasons , which thucydides called prophasis . thucydides argued that the three primary real reasons for waging war are reasonable fear , honor , and interest , while the stated reasons involve appeals to nationalism or fearmongering ( as opposed to descriptions of reasonable , empirical causes for fear ) .