skåneland ( swedish and danish ) or skånelandene ( danish ) is a region on the southern scandinavian peninsula . it includes the sweden provinces of blekinge , halland and skåne . the danish island of bornholm is sometimes also included . for popular usage , see for example the publication populärhistoria : hjälpreda om skåneland : '' skåneland , d v s halland , skåne och blekinge '' , fredsfördraget firas i altranstädt : '' sverige ingick mot slutet av århundradet i en västeuropeisk allians med holland och england och kunde därigenom stoppa danmarks revanschplaner för förlusten av skåneland '' , ett liv fyllt av skandaler : '' år 1660 , då marie grubbe anlänt till köpenhamn , satt fredrik iii på danmarks tron . det var han som hade förlorat skåneland till sverige vid roskildefreden 1658 '' . skåneland has no official recognition or function and the term is not in common usage . equivalent terms in english and latin are '' the scanian provinces '' and '' terrae scaniae '' respectively . the term is mostly used in historical contexts and not in daily speech . in danish , skånelandene is used more often . the terms have no political implications as the region is not a geopolitical entity but a cultural region , without officially established political borders . the provinces making up skåneland were part of denmark from at least the 9th century , '' skånelandene havde altid været en rig og god del af riget og hørt til det siden i hvert fald 800-årene , så det er ikke sært . '' sometimes referred to as the '' eastern provinces '' ; since a 12th-century civil war , denmark has been a kingdom with a single king . hoffmann , erich ( 1981 ) . '' the unity of the kingdom and the provinces in denmark during the middle ages . '' in skyum-nielsen , niels and niels lund , eds . ( 1981 ) . danish medieval history , new currents . museum tusculanum press , . ( on p . 101 , dr . hoffmann , professor at university of kiel , argues that the contemporary descriptions of scania as an autonomous polity had merit ; scania was often disagreeing in the choice of kings , which resulted in several , simultaneously elected kings in the early danish state . scania became officially integrated as a province in the late 12th century , with the treaty of lolland . the provinces were part of the territory ceded to sweden in 1658 under the treaty of roskilde , but after an uprising on bornholm , that island was returned to denmark in 1660 , under the treaty of copenhagen . the last peace treaty between sweden and denmark in which skåneland was a main issue was signed on 3 july 1720 in stockholm .