was a japanese author in the early shōwa period known for his poetic short stories . kajii left behind masterpieces such as , . and . his poetic works were praised by fellow writers including yasunari kawabata and yukio mishima . today his works are admired for their finely tuned self-observation and descriptive power . despite the limited body of work he created during his short lifetime , kajii has managed to leave a lasting footprint on japanese culture . '' lemon '' is a staple of literature textbooks . according to a report in major daily newspaper asahi shimbun , many high school students have emulated the protagonist 's defiant act of leaving a lemon in the book section of maruzen , a department store chain . '' & nbsp ; i read an article about maruzen closing its business in yesterday 's asahi journal evening edition . it claims that many people are leaving lemons in the department store , just like the main character in motojiro kajii 's short story titled lemon . coincidentally , i learned that many people are buying lemon from the bookstore inside maruzen . lemon is featured in school textbooks ; there are n't many japanese who do n't know the story . i am fond of the story myself . i learned the name maruzen for the first time through lemon . to be perfectly honest . i left a lemon in maruzen when i was a high school student . my friend did the same . it must have been a nuisance for the people who worked there . & nbsp ; '' – hideo kojima ( creator of the metal gear solid video games for konami ) , in the '' & nbsp ; on october 10 maruzen will close their kyoto shop which is associated with this novel lemon . after they announced their closure , store staff found lemons on the books . they had lemons before a few times in a year , but this year they have found 11 lemons already . & nbsp ; '' – mari kanazawa ( notable tokyo blogger ) , in the monday , october 03 , 2005 entry '' a lemon on books '' of her english blog '' watashi to tokyo – me and tokyo '' the opening line of '' under the cherry trees '' ( dead bodies are buried under the cherry trees ! ) is popularly quoted '' why is the cherry blossom ( sakura ) cherished ? '' in reference to hanami , the japanese custom of cherry blossom viewing .