the federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund and federal disability insurance trust fund ( collectively , the social security trust fund or trust funds ) are trust funds that provide for payment of social security ( old-age , survivors , and disability insurance ; oasdi ) benefits administered by the united states social security administration . the social security administration collects payroll taxes and uses the money collected to pay old-age , survivors , and disability insurance benefits by way of trust funds . when the program runs a surplus , the excess funds increase the value of the trust fund . at the end of 2014 , the trust fund contained ( or alternatively , was owed ) 2.79 trillion , up 25 billion from 2013 . social security trustees report-press release-july 2015 the trust fund is required by law to be invested in non-marketable securities issued and guaranteed by the '' full faith and credit '' of the federal government . these securities earn a market rate of interest . social security administration-what are the trust funds ? -retrieved july 21 , 2015 excess funds are used by the government for non-social security purposes , creating the obligations to the social security administration and thus program recipients . however , congress could cut these obligations by altering the law . trust fund obligations are considered '' intra-governmental '' debt , a component of the '' public '' or '' national '' debt . as of june 2015 , the intragovernmental debt was 5.1 trillion of the 18.2 trillion national debt . u.s . treasury direct-statement of the public debt-june 2015 according to the social security trustees , who oversee the program and report on its financial condition , program costs are expected to exceed non-interest income from 2010 onward . however , due to interest ( earned at a 3.6 % rate in 2014 ) the program will run an overall surplus that adds to the fund through the end of 2019 . under current law , the securities in the trust fund represent a legal obligation the government must honor when program revenues are no longer sufficient to fully fund benefit payments . however , when the trust fund is used to cover program deficits in a given year , the trust fund balance is reduced . by 2034 , the trust fund is expected to be exhausted . thereafter , payroll taxes are projected to only cover approximately 79 % of program obligations . social security trustees report press release-july 2015 there have been various proposals to address this shortfall , including reducing government expenditures , such as by raising the retirement age ; tax increases ; and borrowing .