in object-oriented programming , the command pattern is a behavioral design pattern in which an object is used to encapsulate all information needed to perform an action or trigger an event at a later time . this information includes the method name , the object that owns the method and values for the method parameters . four terms always associated with the command pattern are command , receiver , invoker and client . a command object knows about receiver and invokes a method of the receiver . values for parameters of the receiver method are stored in the command . the receiver object to execute these methods is also stored in the command object by aggregation . the receiver then does the work when the execute ( ) method in command is called . an invoker object knows how to execute a command , and optionally does bookkeeping about the command execution . the invoker does not know anything about a concrete command , it knows only about the command interface . invoker object ( s ) , command objects and receiver objects are held by a client object , the client decides which receiver objects it assigns to the command objects , and which commands it assigns to the invoker . the client decides which commands to execute at which points . to execute a command , it passes the command object to the invoker object . using command objects makes it easier to construct general components that need to delegate , sequence or execute method calls at a time of their choosing without the need to know the class of the method or the method parameters . using an invoker object allows bookkeeping about command executions to be conveniently performed , as well as implementing different modes for commands , which are managed by the invoker object , without the need for the client to be aware of the existence of bookkeeping or modes . the central ideas of this design pattern closely mirror the semantics of first-class functions and higher-order functions in functional programming languages . specifically , the invoker object is a higher-order function of which the command object is a first-class argument .