john paul stevens ( april 20 , 1920 & nbsp ; – july 16 , 2019 ) was an american lawyer and jurist who served as an associate justice of the united states supreme court from 1975 until his voluntary retirement in 2010 . at the time of his retirement , he was the second-oldest-serving justice in the history of the court and the third-longest-serving justice . at the time of his death , he was the longest lived supreme court justice ever . his long tenure saw him write for the court on most issues of american law , including civil liberties , death penalty , government action and intellectual property . in cases involving president of the united states , he wrote for the court that they were to be held accountable under american law . a registered republican when appointed who throughout his life identified as a conservative , stevens was considered to have been on the liberal side of the court at the time of his retirement . born in chicago , stevens served in the united states navy during world war ii and graduated from northwestern university school of law . after clerking for justice wiley blount rutledge , he co-founded a law firm in chicago , focusing on antitrust law . in 1970 , president richard nixon appointed stevens to the court of appeals for the seventh circuit . five years later , president gerald ford successfully nominated stevens to the supreme court to fill the vacancy caused by the retirement of justice william o . douglas . he became the senior associate justice after the retirement of harry blackmun in 1994 . stevens retired during the administration of president barack obama and was succeeded by elena kagan . stevens 's majority opinions in landmark cases include chevron v . natural resources defense council , apprendi v . new jersey , hamdan v . rumsfeld , kelo v . city of new london , and massachusetts v . environmental protection agency . stevens is also known for his dissents in texas v . johnson , bush v . gore , district of columbia v . heller , and citizens united v . fec .