a tribute ( /ˈtrɪbjuːt/ ) ( from latin tributum , contribution ) is wealth , often in kind , that a party gives to another as a sign of respect or , as was often the case in historical contexts , of submission or allegiance . various ancient states exacted tribute from the rulers of land which the state conquered or otherwise threatened to conquer . in case of alliances , lesser parties may pay tribute to more powerful parties as a sign of allegiance and often in order to finance projects that would benefit both parties . to be called '' tribute '' a recognition by the payer of political submission to the payee is normally required ; the large sums , essentially protection money , paid by the later roman and byzantine empires to barbarian peoples to prevent them attacking imperial territory , would not usually be termed '' tribute '' as the empire accepted no inferior political position . payments by a superior political entity to an inferior one , made for various purposes , are described by terms including '' subsidy '' . the ancient persian achaemenid empire is an example of an ancient tribute empire ; one that made relatively few demands on its non-persian subjects other than the regular payment of tribute , which might be gold , luxury goods , animals , soldiers or slaves . however , failure to keep up the payments had dire consequences . the reliefs at persepolis show processions of figures bearing varied types of tribute . the medieval mongol invasion of rus ' also expected only tribute from the russian states , which continued to govern themselves . athens received tribute from the other cities of the delian league . the empires of assyria , babylon , carthage and rome exacted tribute from their provinces and subject kingdoms . ancient china chinese tributary system such as japan , korea , vietnam , cambodia , borneo , indonesia , sri lanka , nepal , myanmar and central asia ( listed here ) . the aztec empire is another example . the roman republic exacted tribute in the form of payments equivalent to proportional property taxes , for the purpose of waging war . tribute empires contrast with those like the roman empire , which more closely controlled and garrisoned subject territories . a tributary state is one that preserves its political position and such independence as it has only by paying tribute . although , roman republic and roman empire sometimes controlled client kingdoms providing it with tribute .