computational archaeology describes computer-based analytical methods for the study of long-term human behaviour and behavioural evolution . as with other sub-disciplines that have prefixed 'computational ' to their name ( e.g . computational biology , computational physics and computational sociology ) , the term is reserved for ( generally mathematical ) methods that could not realistically be performed without the aid of a computer . computational archaeology may include the use of geographic information systems ( gis ) , especially when applied to spatial analyses such as viewshed analysis and least-cost path analysis as these approaches are sufficiently computationally complex that they are extremely difficult if not impossible to implement without the processing power of a computer . likewise , some forms of statistical and mathematical modelling , and the computer simulation of human behaviour and behavioural evolution using software tools such as swarm or repast would also be impossible to calculate without computational aid . the application of a variety of other forms of complex and bespoke software to solve archaeological problems , such as human perception and movement within built environments using software such as university college london space syntax program , also falls under the term 'computational archaeology ' . the acquisition , documentation and analysis of archaeological finds at excavations and in museums is an important field having ceramic analysis as one of the major topics . in this area 3d-acquisition techniques like 3d scanning ( sls ) , photogrammetry methods like structure from motion ( sfm ) , computed tomography as well as their combinations provide large data-sets of numerous objects for digital pottery research . these techniques are increasingly integrated into the in-situ workflow of excavations . the austrian subproject of the corpus vasorum antiquorum ( cva ) is seminal for digital research on finds within museums . computational archaeology is also known as archaeological informatics ( burenhult 2002 , huggett and ross 2004 ) or archaeoinformatics ( sometimes abbreviated as '' ai '' , but not to be confused with artificial intelligence ) .