the battle of marengo was fought on 14 june 1800 between french forces under the first consul napoleon bonaparte and austrian forces near the city of alessandria , in piedmont , italy . near the end of the day , the french overcame gen . michael von melas 's surprise attack , driving the austrians out of italy and consolidating napoleon 's political position in paris as first consul of france in the wake of his coup d ’ état the previous november . hollins , encyclopedia , pp . 605–606 surprised by the austrian advance toward genoa in mid-april 1800 , bonaparte hastily led his army over the alps in mid-may and reached milan on 2 june . after cutting melas ’ line of communications by crossing the river po and defeating feldmarschallleutnant ( fml ) peter karl ott von bátorkéz at montebello on 9 june , the french closed in on the austrian army , which had massed in alessandria . deceived by a local double agent , bonaparte dispatched large forces to the north and south , but the austrians launched a surprise attack on 14 june against the main french army under gen . louis alexandre berthier . hollins , encyclopedia , p . 606 initially their two assaults across the fontanone stream near marengo village were repelled , and gen . jean lannes reinforced the french right . bonaparte realized the true position and issued orders at 11:00 & nbsp ; am to recall the detachment under général de division ( gdd ) louis desaix , while moving his reserve forward . on the austrian left ott 's column had taken castel ceriolo , and its advance guard moved south to attack lannes ’ flank . melas renewed the main assault and the austrians broke the central french position . by 2:30 & nbsp ; pm the french were withdrawing and austrian dragoons seized the marengo farm . bonaparte had by then arrived with the reserve , but berthier 's troops began to fall back on the main vine belts . knowing desaix was approaching , bonaparte was anxious about a column of ott 's soldiers marching from the north , so he deployed his consular guard infantry to delay it . the french then withdrew steadily eastward toward san giuliano vecchio as the austrians formed a column to follow them in line with ott 's advance in the northern sector . desaix 's arrival around 5:30 & nbsp ; pm stabilized the french position , as the 9th light infantry regiment delayed the austrian advance down the main road and the rest of the army reformed north of cascina grossa . as the pursuing austrian troops arrived , a mix of musketry and artillery fire concealed the surprise attack of brigadier general ( gdb ) françois étienne de kellermann ’ s cavalry , which threw the austrian pursuit into disordered flight back into alessandria , with about 14,000 killed , wounded or captured . the french casualties were considerably fewer , but included desaix . the whole french line chased after the austrians to seal une victoire politique ( a political victory ) that secured bonaparte 's grip on power after the coup . it would be followed by a propaganda campaign that sought to rewrite the story of the battle three times during napoleon 's rule .