the amstrad pcw series is a range of personal computers produced by british company amstrad from 1985 to 1998 , and also sold under licence in europe as the '' joyce '' by the german electronics company schneider in the early years of the series ' life . the pcw , short for personal computer word-processor , was targeted at the wordprocessing and home office markets . when it was launched the cost of a pcw system was under 25 % of the cost of almost all ibm-compatible pc systems in the uk , and as a result the machine was very popular both in the uk and in europe , persuading many technophobes to venture into using computers . however the last two models , introduced in the mid-1990s , were commercial failures , being squeezed out of the market by the falling prices , greater capabilities and wider range of software for ibm-compatible pcs . in all models , including the last , the monitor 's casing included the cpu , ram , floppy disk drives and power supply for all of the systems ' components . all except the last included a printer in the price . early models used 3-inch floppy disks , while those sold from 1991 onwards used 3½-inch floppies , which became the industry standard around the time the pcw series was launched . a variety of inexpensive products and services were launched to copy 3-inch floppies to the 3½-inch format so that data could be transferred to other machines . all models except the last included the locoscript word processing program , the cp/m plus operating system , mallard basic and the logo programming language at no extra cost . a wide range of other cp/m office software and several games became available , some commercially produced and some free . although amstrad supplied all but the last model as text based systems , graphical user interface peripherals and the supporting software also became available . the last model had its own unique gui operating system and set of office applications , which were included in the price . however none of the software for previous pcw models could run on this system .