carr 's two major detective characters , dr . fell and sir henry merrivale , are superficially quite similar . both are large , upper-class , eccentric englishmen somewhere between middle-aged and elderly . dr . fell , who is fat and walks only with the aid of two canes , was clearly modeled on the british writer g . k . chesterton and is at all times civil and genial . he has a great mass of untidy hair that is often covered by a '' shovel hat '' and he generally wears a cape . he lives in a modest cottage and does not have any official association with public authorities . henry merrivale or '' h.m . '' , on the other hand , although stout and with a majestic '' corporation '' , is active physically and is feared for his ill-temper and noisy rages . in a 1949 novel , a graveyard to let , for example , he demonstrates an unexpected talent for hitting baseballs improbable distances . a wealthy descendant of the '' oldest baronetcy '' in england , he is part of the establishment ( even though he frequently rails against it ) and in the earlier novels is the director of the british secret service . in the plague court murders he is said to be qualified as both a barrister and a medical doctor . even in the earliest books the bald , bespectacled , and scowling h.m . is clearly a churchillian figure and in the later novels this similarity is somewhat more consciously evoked . many of the merrivale novels , written using the carter dickson byline , rank with carr 's best work , including the much-praised the judas window ( 1938 ) . many of the fell novels feature two or more different impossible crimes , including he who whispers ( 1946 ) and the case of the constant suicides ( 1941 ) . the novel the crooked hinge ( 1938 ) combines a seemingly impossible throat-slashing , witchcraft , a survivor of the ship titanic , an eerie automaton modeled on wolfgang von kempelen 's chess player , and a case similar to that of the tichborne claimant into what is often cited as one of the greatest classics of detective fiction . but even carr 's biographer , douglas g . greene , notes that the explanation , like many of carr 's in other books , seriously stretches plausibility and the reader 's credulity . dr . fell 's own discourse on locked room mysteries in chapter 17 of the hollow man is acclaimed critically and is sometimes printed as a stand-alone essay in its own right .