yazoo ( known as yaz in north america ) were an english synth-pop duo from basildon , essex , consisting of former depeche mode member vince clarke ( keyboards ) and alison moyet ( vocals ) . the duo formed in late 1981 after clarke responded to an advertisement moyet placed in a british music magazine , although the pair had known each other since their schooldays . over the next 18 months the duo released two albums , upstairs at eric 's and you and me both , which received critical acclaim for their production , particularly the blending of clarke 's synthesizer melodies with moyet 's blues- and soul-influenced vocals . yazoo enjoyed worldwide success , particularly in their home country , where three of their four singles reached the top three of the uk singles chart and both their albums made the top two of the uk albums chart . in north america , they are known for the song '' situation '' , which , though originally only a b-side in the united kingdom , was a club and airplay success in the united states and canada before being released as the band 's debut single in north america . despite their success , the duo split acrimoniously in may 1983 as a result of a combination of clarke 's reluctance to make more records under the yazoo name , a clash of personalities , and a lack of communication between the pair . clarke went on to form erasure , another successful and longer-lasting synth-pop duo , while moyet embarked on a highly successful solo career . although their musical career was short , yazoo 's combination of electronic instrumentation and soulful female vocals has been cited as an influence on the house music scene that emerged in the mid-1980s , as well as on bands such as lcd soundsystem ( who name-checked the duo on their debut single '' losing my edge '' ) , hercules and love affair ( whose leader andy butler has said that '' situation '' was his biggest musical inspiration as a child ) , la roux , shiny toy guns and blaqk audio . in 2008 , 25 years after splitting , clarke and moyet reconciled and reformed yazoo to play a successful tour of the uk , europe and north america in support of the reissue of yazoo 's two studio albums and a box set , in your room of their material . the pair briefly reunited in may 2011 to play three yazoo songs at a music festival organised by their record label .