alagoas , the european portuguese pronunciation is . is one of the 27 states of brazil and is situated in the eastern part of the northeast region . it borders : pernambuco ( n and nw ) ; sergipe ( s ) ; bahia ( sw ) ; and the atlantic ocean ( e ) . its capital is the city of maceió . it has 1.6 % of the brazilian population and produces only 0.1 % of the brazilian gdp . it is made up of 102 municipalities and its most populous cities are maceió , arapiraca , palmeira dos índios , rio largo , penedo , união dos palmares , são miguel dos campos , santana do ipanema , delmiro gouveia , coruripe , marechal deodoro , and campo alegre . it is the second smallest brazilian state in area ( larger only than sergipe ) , and with sergipe it is sometimes called the rhode island of brazil . it is 16th in population . it is also one of the largest producers of sugarcane and coconuts in the country , and has an economy based on cattle raising . land of the sururu ( or charru mussel ) , lagoon shellfish which serves as food for the coastal population , and of coconut , alagoas also possesses some of the country 's richest folklore . initially , the alagoano territory constituted the southern part of the captaincy of pernambuco and only gained its autonomy in 1817 . its occupation pushed the expansion of the captaincy sugarcane farming , which required new areas of cultivation , southward . thus arose porto calvo , alagoas ( now marechal deodoro ) and penedo , nuclei which guided the colonization , economic , and social life of the region for a long time . the dutch brazil in pernambuco was extended to alagoas in 1631 . the invaders were expelled in 1645 , after intense fighting in porto calvo , leaving the economy in ruins . the escape of african slaves during the dutch invasion created a serious labour shortage problem on the sugarcane plantations . grouped in villages called quilombos , the africans were only completely dominated at the end of the 17th century with the destruction of the most important quilombo , palmares . during the empire , the separatist and republican confederation of the equator ( 1824 ) received the support of noteworthy alagoano figures . throughout the 1840s , political life was marked by the conflict between the lisos ( lit . '' straights '' , not the heterosexual connotation ) , conservatism , and the cabeludos ( lit . '' hairies '' ) , liberals . at the beginning of the 20th century , the alagoano hinterland lived through the pioneering experience of delmiro gouveia , a pernambucano entrepreneur who installed the estrela thread factory , which came to produce 200 spools daily . delmiro gouveia was killed in october 1917 in circumstances still unclarified , after being pressured , according to rumor , to sell his factory to competing foreign firms . after his death , his machines would be destroyed and thrown into paulo afonso falls . nicknamed the land of the marshals ( terra dos marechais ) , for being the birthplace of deodoro da fonseca and floriano peixoto , alagoas gave the country numerous illustrious brazilians among whom are the anthropologist arthur ramos , the maestro hekel tavares , the philologist aurélio buarque de holanda , the musicians djavan and hermeto pascoal the poet jorge de lima , the jurists pontes de miranda and marcos bernardes de mello , besides the writers lêdo ivo and graciliano ramos .