an ahnentafel ( german for '' ancestor table '' ; or ahnenreihe ( '' ancestor series '' ; is a genealogical numbering system for listing a person 's direct ancestors in a fixed sequence of ascent . the subject ( or proband ) of the ahnentafel is listed as , the subject 's father as and the mother as , the paternal grandparents as and and the maternal grandparents as and , and so on , back through the generations . apart from , who can be male or female , all even-numbered persons are male , and all odd-numbered persons are female . in this schema , the number of any person 's father is double the person 's number , and a person 's mother is double the person 's number plus one . using this definition of numeration , one can derive some basic information about individuals who are listed without additional research . this construct displays a person 's genealogy compactly , without the need for a diagram such as a family tree . it is particularly useful in situations where one may be restricted to presenting a genealogy in plain text , for example , in e-mails or newsgroup articles . in effect , an ahnentafel is a binary tree methods for storing binary trees by listing the nodes ( individuals ) in level-order ( in generation order ) . the ahnentafel system of numeration is also known as : the eytzinger method , for michaël eytzinger , the austrian-born historian who first published the principles of the system in 1590 ; eytzinger , michael , thesaurus principum hac aetate in europa viventium , quo progenitores eorum . simul ac fratres et sonores inde ab origine reconduntur . usque ad annum . , cologne : g . kempensem , 1590 ( 1591 ) . note : in commentaries , his surname may appear in variant forms , including : aitsingeri , aitsingero , aitsingerum , eyzingern . the sosa method , named for jeronimo de sosa , the spanish genealogist who popularized the numbering system in his work noticia de la gran casa de los marqueses de villafranca in 1676 ; jouniaux , léo , généalogie : pratique , méthode , recherche , quercy : seuil , 2006 , pp . 44–45 . and the sosa–stradonitz method , for stephan kekulé von stradonitz , the genealogist and son of friedrich august kekulé , who published his interpretation of sosa 's method in his ahnentafel-atlas in 1898 . kekulé von stradonitz , stephan , ahnentafel-atlas . ahnentafeln zu 32 ahnen der regenten europas und ihrer gemahlinnen , berlin : j . a . stargardt , 1898–1904 . this volume contains 79 charts of the sovereigns of europe and their wives . '' ahnentafel '' is a loan word from the german language , and its german equivalents are ahnenreihe and ahnenliste . an ahnentafel list is sometimes called a '' kekulé '' after stephan kekulé von stradonitz . a variant of is known in french as seize quartiers .