clark and cunningham met on the school bus and became close friends . mutual friend neil mitchell , prompted by his pals ' positive attitude , promised to supply keyboards when he could scrape together enough money from his paper round . to complete the quartet , clark approached mark mclachlan , who at the time was training to be a painter and decorator . he said , '' at break we all went behind the kitchen for a fly smoke , and there in the corner was this quiet kid who said very little , but when he sang , everyone listened . '' end of part one : their greatest hits liner notes it was sometime in 1983 that graeme duffin joined wet wet wet , after the departure of co-founder lindsey mccauley . duffin had previously been in a glasgow-based band called new celeste and recorded two albums with them high sands and the liquid lake ( 1977 ) in holland ( with sleeve notes by billy connolly ) on the universe label and on the line ( 1979 ) in berlin on the hansa records label . the band combined folk , rock and jazz players . with the line-up complete , rehearsals took place in mrs . clark 's kitchen . they rehearsed for about two years , working on song producing and writing skills . they eventually made their live debut at glasgow 's nightmoves venue . at this gig they met elliot davis , who would become the band 's manager . the band name wet wet wet was chosen from a line in the 1982 scritti politti song '' gettin ' havin ' & holdin ' '' ( '' it 's tired of joking . wet , wet with tears '' ) , and mclachlan changed his name to stage name '' marti pellow '' . their first professional gig was a new year 's eve show at glasgow 's barrowlands . behind the smile documentary , 2004 david bates signed the band to polygram in 1985 . one of the first demo songs they did was '' wishing i was lucky '' . when the band took the demo to bates in late 1986 , he discarded it as a poor effort . the band decided at this point that they could no longer work with him . six months later , the band and their new a & r manager , nick angel , released the single , and it reached number six in the uk singles chart . '' i was in a queue in a fish and chip shop in glasgow when it came on radio clyde , '' cunningham remembers . '' i felt like shouting to everybody , 'that 's me and my mates ! ' it was an incredible feeling i 've not forgotten . '' the parent album , popped in souled out , also became a hit and produced three more hit singles , namely '' sweet little mystery '' , '' temptation '' , and '' angel eyes '' . they supported lionel richie on his uk tour .