a thyristor is a solid-state semiconductor device with four layers of alternating p- and n-type materials . it acts exclusively as a bistable switch , conducting when the gate receives a current trigger , and continuing to conduct until the voltage across the device is reversed biased , or until the voltage is removed ( by some other means ) . there are two designs , differing in what triggers the conducting state . in a three-lead thyristor , a small current on its gate lead controls the larger current of the anode to cathode path . in a two-lead thyristor , conduction begins when the potential difference between the anode and cathode themselves is sufficiently large ( breakdown voltage ) . some sources define silicon-controlled rectifier ( scr ) and thyristor as synonymous . christiansen , donald ; alexander , charles k . ( 2005 ) ; standard handbook of electrical engineering ( 5th edition . ) . mcgraw-hill , other sources define thyristors as more complex devices that incorporate at least four layers of alternating n-type and p-type substrate . the first thyristor devices were released commercially in 1956 . because thyristors can control a relatively large amount of power and voltage with a small device , they find wide application in control of electric power , ranging from light dimmers and electric motor speed control to high-voltage direct-current power transmission . thyristors may be used in power-switching circuits , relay-replacement circuits , inverter circuits , oscillator circuits , level-detector circuits , chopper circuits , light-dimming circuits , low-cost timer circuits , logic circuits , speed-control circuits , phase-control circuits , etc . originally , thyristors relied only on current reversal to turn them off , making them difficult to apply for direct current ; newer device types can be turned on and off through the control gate signal . the latter is known as a gate turn-off thyristor , or gto thyristor . a thyristor is not a proportional device like a transistor . in other words , a thyristor can only be fully on or off , while a transistor can lie in between on and off states . this makes a thyristor unsuitable as an analog amplifier , but useful as a switch .