type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) , formerly known as adult-onset diabetes , is a form of diabetes that is characterized by hyperglycemia , insulin resistance , and relative lack of insulin . common symptoms include polydipsia , polyuria , and unexplained weight loss . symptoms may also include polyphagia , feeling tired , and sores that do not heal . often symptoms come on slowly . long-term complications from high blood sugar include heart disease , strokes , diabetic retinopathy which can result in blindness , kidney failure , and poor blood flow in the limbs which may lead to amputations . the sudden onset of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state may occur ; however , ketoacidosis is uncommon . type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes primarily occurs as a result of obesity and lack of exercise . some people are more heredity at risk than others . type 2 diabetes makes up about 90 % of cases of diabetes , with the other 10 % due primarily to type 1 diabetes and gestational diabetes . in type 1 diabetes there is a lower total level of insulin to control blood glucose , due to an autoimmune induced loss of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas . diagnosis of diabetes is by blood tests such as fasting plasma glucose , oral glucose tolerance test , or glycated hemoglobin ( a1c ) . type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes is largely preventable by staying a normal weight , exercising regularly , and eating properly . treatment involves exercise and diabetic diet . if blood sugar levels are not adequately lowered , the medication metformin is typically recommended . many people may eventually also require insulin injections . in those on insulin , routinely checking blood sugar levels is advised ; however , this may not be needed in those taking pills . bariatric surgery often improves diabetes in those who are obese . rates of type & nbsp ; 2 diabetes have increased markedly since 1960 in parallel with obesity . as of 2015 there were approximately 392 & nbsp ; million people diagnosed with the disease compared to around 30 & nbsp ; million in 1985 . typically it begins in middle or older age , although rates of type 2 diabetes are increasing in young people . type 2 diabetes is associated with a ten-year-shorter life expectancy . diabetes was one of the first diseases described . the importance of insulin in the disease was determined in the 1920s .