image : african daisy ( osteospermum sp . 'pink whirls ' ) . jpg right thumb 250px osteospermum 'pink whirls ' a cultivar selected for its intriguing and colourful flowers a cultivar cultivar has two denominations as explained in formal definition . when referring to a taxon , the word does not apply to an individual plant but to all plants that share the unique characters that define the cultivar . ( cultivated variety ) is an assemblage of plants selected for desirable characteristics that are maintained during propagation . more generally , a cultivar is the most basic classification category of cultivated plants in the international code of nomenclature for cultivated plants ( icncp ) . most cultivars arise in cultivation , but some are from wild plants that have distinctive characteristics . popular ornamental garden plants like roses , camellias , daffodils , rhododendrons , and azaleas are cultivars produced by selective breeding or as sports , for floral colour or size , plant form , or other desirable characteristics . similarly , the world 's agricultural food crops are almost exclusively cultivars that have been selected for characters such as improved yield , flavour , and resistance to disease , and very few wild plants are now used as food sources . trees used in forestry are also special selections grown for their enhanced quality and yield of timber . cultivars form a major part of liberty hyde bailey 's broader group , the cultigen , which is defined as a plant whose origin or selection is primarily due to intentional human activity . a cultivar is not the same as a variety ( botany ) , which is a taxonomic rank below subspecies , and there are differences in the rules for creating and using the names of botanical varieties and cultivars . in recent times , the naming of cultivars has been complicated by the use of statutory patents for plants and recognition of plant breeders ' rights . see the international union for the protection of new varieties of plants ( upov – offers legal protection of plant cultivars to persons or organisations that introduce new cultivars to commerce . upov requires that a cultivar be '' distinct , uniform '' , and '' stable '' . to be '' distinct '' , it must have characters that easily distinguish it from any other known cultivar . to be '' uniform '' and '' stable '' , the cultivar must retain these characters in repeated propagation . the naming of cultivars is an important aspect of cultivated plant taxonomy , and the correct naming of a cultivar is prescribed by the rules and recommendations of the international code of nomenclature for cultivated plants ( icncp , commonly denominated the cultivated plant code ) . a cultivar is given a cultivar name , which consists of the scientific latin botanical name followed by a cultivar epithet . the cultivar epithet is usually in a vernacular language . for example , the full cultivar name of the king edward potato is solanum tuberosum 'king edward ' . 'king edward ' is the cultivar epithet , which , according to the rules of the cultivated plant code , is bounded by single quotation marks . cultivated plant code article 14.1