a wetsuit is a garment worn to provide thermal protection while wet . it is usually made of foamed neoprene , and is worn by surfing , divers , windsurfers , canoeists , and others engaged in water sports and other activities in or on water , primarily providing thermal insulation , but also buoyancy and protection from abrasion , ultraviolet exposure and stings from marine organisms . the insulation properties of neoprene foam depend mainly on bubbles of gas enclosed within the material , which reduce its ability to conduct heat . the bubbles also give the wetsuit a low density , providing buoyancy in water . hugh bradner , a university of california , berkeley , physicist invented the modern wetsuit in 1952 . wetsuits became available in the mid-1950s and evolved as the relatively fragile foamed neoprene was first backed , and later sandwiched , with thin sheets of tougher material such as nylon or later spandex . improvements in the way joints in the wetsuit were made by gluing , taping and blindstitching , helped the suit to remain waterproof and reduce flushing , the replacement of water trapped between suit and body by cold water from the outside . further improvements in the seals at the neck , wrists , ankles and zippers produced a suit known as a '' semi-dry '' . different types of wetsuit are made for different uses and for different temperatures . suits range from a thin ( 2 & nbsp ; mm or less ) '' shortie '' , covering just the torso , to a full 8 & nbsp ; mm semi-dry , usually complemented by neoprene boots , gloves and hood . the difference between a wetsuit and a dry suit is that a wetsuit allows water to enter the suit , while dry suits are designed to prevent water from entering , thus keeping the undergarments dry and preserving their insulating effectiveness . wetsuits can give adequate protection in warm to moderately cold waters . dry suits are typically more expensive and more complex to use , but can be used where protection from lower temperatures or contaminated water is needed .