the history of tyrol , a historical region in the middle alpine area of central europe , dates back to early human settlements at the end of the last glacier period , around 12,000 bc . sedentary settlements of farmers and herders can be traced back to 5000 bc . many of the main and side valleys were settled during the early bronze age , from 1800 to 1300 bc . from these settlements , two prominent cultures emerged : the laugen-melaun culture in the bronze age , and the fritzens-sanzeno culture in the iron age . the region was conquered by the romans in 15 bc . the northern and eastern areas were incorporated into the roman empire as the provinces of raetia and noricum , leaving deep impressions on the culture and language , with the rhaeto-romance languages . following the conquest of italy by the goths , tyrol became part of the ostrogothic kingdom in the fifth and sixth centuries . in 553 , southern tyrol was incorporated into the lombards ' kingdom of italy , northern tyrol came under the influence of the bavarii , and western tyrol became part of alamannia—the three areas meeting at present-day bolzano . in 774 , charlemagne conquered the lombards , and as a consequence , tyrol became an important bridgehead to italy . in the eleventh century , the emperors of the holy roman empire granted the counties of trento , bolzano , and vinschgau to the bishopric of trent , and the county of norital and puster valley to the bishopric of brixen—effectually placing the region under the control of the emperors . in the coming centuries , the counts residing in tirol castle near merano extended their territory over the region . later counts would hold much of their territory directly from the holy roman emperor . the meinhardinger family , originating in gorizia , controlled the tyrol , gorizia , and the duchy of carinthia . by 1295 , the '' county and reign of tyrol '' had established itself firmly in the '' land on the adige and inn '' , as the region was then called . when the meinhardiner dynasty died out in 1369 , the tyrol was ceded to the house of habsburg , who ruled over the region for the next five and a half centuries , with a brief period of control in the early nineteenth century by the bavarians during the napoleonic wars . at the conclusion of world war i , the treaty of saint-germain-en-laye of 1919 ceded the southern part of tyrol to the kingdom of italy , including present day-south tyrol with its large german-speaking majority . the northern part of tyrol was retained by the first austrian republic . the historical region is formed by the present-day austrian state of tyrol and the italian provinces of south tyrol and trentino . the boundaries of this tyrol–south tyrol–trentino euroregion correspond to the former habsburg county of tyrol , which gave this historical region its name .