the eugenics board of north carolina ( ebnc ) was a state board of the state of north carolina formed in july 1933 by the north carolina general assembly by the passage of house bill 1013 , entitled 'an act to amend chapter 34 of the public laws of 1929 of north carolina relating to the sterilization of persons mentally defective' . this bill formally repealed a 1929 law , which had been ruled as unconstitutional by the north carolina supreme court earlier in the year . over time , the board shifted their focus to include sterilizations . their original purpose was to oversee the practice of sterilization as it pertained to inmates or patients of public-funded institutions that were judged to be 'mentally defective or feeble-minded ' by authorities . the majority of these sterilizations were coerced . academic sources have observed that this was not only an ableist and classist project but also a racist one , as blacks were disproportionately targeted . of the 7,686 people who were sterilized in north carolina after 1933 , 5,000 were black . american civil liberties union attorney brenda feign fasteau said of the situation , '' as far as i can determine , the statistics reveal that since 1964 , approximately 65 percent of the women sterilized in north carolina were black and approximately 35 percent were white . '' in contrast to other eugenics programs across the united states , the north carolina board enabled county departments of public welfare to petition for the sterilization of their clients . the board remained in operation until 1977 . during its existence thousands of individuals were sterilized . in 1977 the n.c . general assembly repealed the laws authorizing its existence , though it would not be until 2003 that the involuntary sterilization laws that underpinned the board 's operations were repealed . today the board 's work is repudiated by people across the political , scientific and private spectrum . in 2013 , north carolina passed legislation to compensate those sterilized under the board 's jurisdiction .