antiandrogens , also known as androgen antagonists or testosterone blockers , are a class of drugs that prevent androgens like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone ( dht ) from mediating their biological effects in the body . they act by blocking the androgen receptor ( ar ) and/or inhibiting or suppressing androgen production . they can be thought of as the functional opposites of ar agonists , for instance androgens and anabolic steroids ( aas ) like testosterone , dht , and nandrolone and selective androgen receptor modulators ( sarms ) like enobosarm . antiandrogens are one of three types of sex-hormonal agents , the others being antiestrogens and antiprogestogens . antiandrogens are used to treat an assortment of androgen-dependent conditions . in males , antiandrogens are used in the treatment of prostate cancer , enlarged prostate , scalp hair loss , hypersexuality , paraphilia , and early puberty . in women , antiandrogens are used to treat acne , seborrhea , hirsutism , scalp hair loss , and hyperandrogenism , such as those that occur in polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) . antiandrogens are also used as a component of feminizing hormone therapy for transgender women and as puberty blockers in transgender girls . side effects of antiandrogens depend on the type of antiandrogen and the specific antiandrogen in question . in any case , common side effects of antiandrogens in men include breast tenderness , gynecomastia , feminization , hot flashes , sexual dysfunction , infertility , and osteoporosis . in women , antiandrogens are much better tolerated , and antiandrogens that work only by directly blocking androgens are associated with minimal side effects . however , because estrogens are made from androgens in the body , antiandrogens that suppress androgen production can cause hypoestrogenism and associated symptoms like hot flashes , menstrual irregularities , and osteoporosis in premenopause women . there are a few different major types of antiandrogens . these include ar antagonists , androgen synthesis inhibitors , and antigonadotropins . ar antagonists work by directly blocking the effects of androgens , while androgen synthesis inhibitors and antigonadotropins work by lowering androgen levels . ar antagonists can be further divided into steroidal antiandrogens and nonsteroidal antiandrogens ; androgen synthesis inhibitors can be further divided mostly into cyp17a1 inhibitors and 5α-reductase inhibitors ; and antigonadotropins can be further divided into gonadotropin-releasing hormone modulators ( gnrh modulators ) , progestogens , and estrogens .