image : fluorescentcells.jpg thumb right 300px the eukaryotic cytoskeleton . actin filaments are shown in red , and microtubules composed of beta tubulin are in green . the cytoskeleton is a complex , dynamic network of interlinking protein filaments present in the cytoplasm of all cells , including bacteria and archaea . it extends from the cell nucleus to the cell membrane and is composed of similar proteins in the various organisms . in eukaryotes , it is composed of three main components , microfilaments , intermediate filaments and microtubules , and these are all capable of rapid growth or disassembly dependent on the cell 's requirements . a multitude of functions can be performed by the cytoskeleton . its primary function is to give the cell its shape and mechanical resistance to deformation , and through association with extracellular connective tissue and other cells it stabilizes entire tissues . the cytoskeleton can also contract , thereby deforming the cell and the cell 's environment and allowing cells to migrate . moreover , it is involved in many cell signaling pathways and in the uptake of extracellular material ( endocytosis ) , the segregation of chromosomes during cell division , the cytokinesis stage of cell division , as scaffolding to organize the contents of the cell in space and in intracellular transport ( for example , the movement of vesicles and organelles within the cell ) and can be a template for the construction of a cell wall . furthermore , it can form specialized structures , such as flagella , cilia , lamellipodia and podosomes . the structure , function and dynamic behavior of the cytoskeleton can be very different , depending on organism and cell type . even within one cell , the cytoskeleton can change through association with other proteins and the previous history of the network . a large-scale example of an action performed by the cytoskeleton is muscle contraction . this is carried out by groups of highly specialized cells working together . a main component in the cytoskeleton that helps show the true function of this muscle contraction is the microfilament . microfilaments are composed of the most abundant cellular protein known as actin . during contraction of a muscle , within each muscle cell , myosin molecular motors collectively exert forces on parallel actin filaments . muscle contraction starts from nerve impulses which then causes increased amounts of calcium to be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum . increases in calcium in the cytosol allows muscle contraction to begin with the help of two proteins , tropomyosin and troponin . tropomyosin inhibits the interaction between actin and myosin , while troponin senses the increase in calcium and releases the inhibition . this action contracts the muscle cell , and through the synchronous process in many muscle cells , the entire muscle .