the following year the orchestra celebrated its 21st birthday , giving a series of concerts at the festival hall and the albert hall in which boult was joined by guest conductors including paul kletzki , jean martinon , hans schmidt-isserstedt , georg solti , walter susskind and vaughan williams . mitchell , donald . '' promenade concerts '' , the musical times , october 1953 , p . & nbsp ; 472 . in 1956 the lpo toured the soviet union , the first british orchestra to do so ; the conductors were boult , anatole fistoulari and george hurst , and the soloists were alfredo campoli and moura lympany . pepper , maurice . '' the london philharmonic orchestra in russia '' , the musical times , february 1957 , pp . & nbsp ; 67–69 . after the tour boult retired as principal conductor , but remained closely associated with the orchestra , and was made its president in 1965 . most of his stereophonic recordings for emi were made with the lpo . simeone and mundy , pp . & nbsp ; 81–96 ; and pirouet , p . & nbsp ; 116 . through the middle and late 1950s the lpo worked with new conductors including constantin silvestri and josef krips . this was a bad period financially for the orchestra , and it was forced to abandon fixed contracts for its players with holiday and sick pay and pensions , and revert to payment by engagement . moore ( unnumbered page ) financial disaster was averted thanks to an anonymous benefactor , generally believed to be boult . pirouet , p . & nbsp ; 119 . a historian of the orchestra , edmund pirouet , writes that having been on an upward curve in the 1940s , by the mid-1950s the orchestra '' was at best marking time '' . pirouet , p . & nbsp ; 116 . in 1958 the lpo appointed william steinberg , also music director of the pittsburgh symphony orchestra , as chief conductor . he was a noted orchestral trainer , and did much to restore playing standards to their former levels . steinberg resigned the lpo post after two seasons , advised by his doctor to restrict his activities . '' dr steinberg leaving london philharmonic '' , the guardian , 1 august 1960 .