el escorial or the royal site of san lorenzo de el escorial , or monasterio del escorial , is a historical residence of the king of spain , in the town of san lorenzo de el escorial , about northwest of the spanish capital , madrid . it is one of the spanish royal sites and functions as a monastery , basilica , royal palace , pantheon , library , museum , university , school and hospital . it is situated up the valley road distance ) from the town of el escorial . el escorial comprises two architectural complexes of great historical and cultural significance : the royal monastery itself and la granjilla de la fresneda , a royal hunting lodge and monastic retreat about five kilometres away . these sites have a dual nature ; that is to say , during the 16th and 17th centuries , they were places in which the power of the spanish monarchy and the ecclesiastical predominance of the roman catholic religion in spain found a common architectural manifestation . el escorial was , at once , a monastery and a spanish royal palace , although philip ii is the only monarch who ever lived in the main building . established with a community of hieronymite monks , it has become a monastery of the order of saint augustine . it was also a boarding school ( real colegio de alfonso xii ) . philip ii of spain ( who reigned 1556–1598 ) engaged the spanish architect juan bautista de toledo to be his collaborator in the building of the complex at el escorial . toledo had spent the greater part of his career in rome , where he had worked on st . peter 's basilica , and in naples , where he had served the king 's viceroy , whose recommendation brought him to the king 's attention . philip appointed him architect-royal in 1559 , and together they designed el escorial as a monument to spain 's role as a center of the christian world . on 2 november 1984 , unesco declared the royal seat of san lorenzo of el escorial a world heritage site . it is a popular tourist attraction , often visited by day-trippers from madrid – more than 500,000 visitors come to el escorial every year .