the autonomic nervous system ( ans ) , formerly the vegetative nervous system , is a division of the peripheral nervous system that supplies smooth muscle and glands , and thus influences the function of viscera . the autonomic nervous system is a control system that acts largely unconsciously and regulates bodily functions , such as the heart rate , digestion , respiratory rate , pupillary dilation , urination , and sexual arousal . this system is the primary mechanism in control of the fight-or-flight response . the autonomic nervous system is regulated by integrated reflexes through the brainstem to the spinal cord and organs . autonomic functions include control of respiration , heart rate ( the cardiac control center ) , vasomotor activity ( the vasomotor center ) , and certain reflex such as coughing , sneezing , swallowing and vomiting . those are then subdivided into other areas and are also linked to autonomic subsystems and the peripheral nervous system . the hypothalamus , just above the brain stem , acts as an integrator for autonomic functions , receiving autonomic regulatory input from the limbic system . allostatic load notebook : parasympathetic function - 1999 , macarthur research network , ucsf the autonomic nervous system has three branches : the sympathetic nervous system , the parasympathetic nervous system and the enteric nervous system . some textbooks do not include the enteric nervous system as part of this system . the sympathetic nervous system is often considered the '' fight or flight '' system , while the parasympathetic nervous system is often considered the '' rest and digest '' or '' feed and breed '' system . in many cases , both of these systems have '' opposite '' actions where one system activates a physiological response and the other inhibits it . an older simplification of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems as '' excitatory '' and '' inhibitory '' was overturned due to the many exceptions found . a more modern characterization is that the sympathetic nervous system is a '' quick response mobilizing system '' and the parasympathetic is a '' more slowly activated dampening system '' , but even this has exceptions , such as in sexual arousal and orgasm , wherein both play a role . there are inhibitory and excitatory synapses between neurons . relatively recently , a third subsystem of neurons that have been named non-noradrenergic , non-cholinergic transmitters ( because they use nitric oxide as a neurotransmitter ) have been described and found to be integral in autonomic function , in particular in the gut and the lungs . although the ans is also known as the visceral nervous system , the ans is only connected with the motor side . most autonomous functions are involuntary but they can often work in conjunction with the somatic nervous system which provides voluntary control .