passivation , in physical chemistry and engineering , refers to a material becoming '' passive , '' that is , less affected or corroded by the environment of future use . passivation involves creation of an outer layer of shield material that is applied as a microcoating , created by chemical reaction with the base material , or allowed to build from spontaneous oxidation in the air . as a technique , passivation is the use of a light coat of a protective material , such as metal oxide , to create a shell against corrosion . '' passivation vs electropolishing - what are the differences ? '' . passivation can occur only in certain conditions , and is used in microelectronics to enhance silicon . iupac goldbook the technique of passivation strengthens and preserves the appearance of metallics . in electrochemical treatment of water , passivation reduces the effectiveness of the treatment by increasing the circuit resistance , and active measures are typically used to overcome this effect , the most common being polarity reversal , which results in limited rejection of the fouling layer . other proprietary systems to avoid electrode passivation , several discussed below , are the subject of ongoing research and development . when exposed to air , many metals naturally form a hard , relatively inert surface , as in the tarnish of silver . in the case of other metals , such as iron , a somewhat rough porous coating is formed from loosely adherent corrosion products . in this case , a substantial amount of metal is removed , which is either deposited or dissolved in the environment . corrosion coating reduces the rate of corrosion by varying degrees , depending on the kind of base metal and its environment , and is notably slower in room-temperature air for aluminium , chromium , zinc , titanium , and silicon ( a metalloid ) . the shell of corrosion product inhibits deeper corrosion , and operates as one form of passivation . the inert surface layer , termed the '' native oxide layer '' , is usually an oxide or a nitride , with a thickness of a monolayer of 0.1-0.3 & nbsp ; nm ( 1-3 & nbsp ; å ) for a noble metal such as platinum , about 1.5 & nbsp ; nm ( 15 & nbsp ; å ) for silicon , and nearer to 5 & nbsp ; nm ( 50 & nbsp ; å ) for aluminium after several years . francis p , low-temperature oxidation : the role of vitreous oxides , a wiley-interscience publication , john wiley & sons , new york , 1986 surface passivation refers to a common semiconductor device fabrication process critical to modern electronics . it is the process by which a semiconductor surface is rendered inert , and does not change semiconductor properties as a result of interaction with air or other materials in contact with the surface or edge of the crystal . this is typically achieved using a form of thermal oxidation . in a silicon semiconductor , this process allows electricity to reliably penetrate to the conducting silicon below the surface , and to overcome the surface states that prevent electricity from reaching the semiconducting layer . surface passivation by thermal oxidation is one of the key features of silicon technology , and is dominant in microelectronics . the surface passivation process was developed by mohamed m . atalla at bell labs in the late 1950s . it is commonly used to manufacture mosfets ( metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors ) and silicon integrated circuit chips ( with the planar process ) , and is critical to the semiconductor industry . surface passivation is also critical to solar cell and carbon quantum dot technologies .