a population bottleneck or genetic bottleneck is a sharp reduction in the size of a population due to environmental events such as famines , earthquakes , floods , fires , disease , and droughts or human activities such as specicide and human population planning . such events can reduce the variation in the gene pool of a population ; thereafter , a smaller population , with a smaller genetic diversity , remains to pass on genes to future generations of offspring through sexual reproduction . genetic diversity remains lower , increasing only when gene flow from another population occurs or very slowly increasing with time as random mutations occur . william r . catton , jr . “ bottleneck : humanity 's impending impasse ” xlibris corporation , 2009 . 290 pp . this results in a reduction in the robustness of the population and in its ability to adapt to and survive selecting environmental changes , such as climate change or a shift in available resources . alternatively , if survivors of the bottleneck are the individuals with the greatest genetic fitness , the frequency of the fitter genes within the gene pool is increased , while the pool itself is reduced . the genetic drift caused by a population bottleneck can change the proportional random distribution of alleles and even lead to loss of alleles . the chances of inbreeding and genetic homogeneity can increase , possibly leading to inbreeding depression . smaller population size can also cause deleterious mutations to accumulate . population bottlenecks play an important role in conservation biology ( see minimum viable population size ) and in the context of agriculture ( biological and pest control ) . scientists have witnessed population bottlenecks in american bison , greater prairie chickens , northern elephant seals , golden hamsters , and cheetahs . the new zealand black robins experienced a bottleneck of five individuals , all descendants of a single female . geneticists have found evidence for past bottlenecks in pandas , golden snub-nosed monkeys , and humans .