the archimedes palimpsest is a parchment codex palimpsest , originally a byzantine greek copy of a compilation of archimedes and other authors , containing two works of archimedes that were thought to have been lost ( the '' stomachion '' and the '' method of mechanical theorems '' ) and the only surviving original greek edition of his work '' on floating bodies . '' the first version of the compilation is believed to have been produced by isidorus of miletus , the architect of the geometrically complex hagia sophia cathedral in constantinople , sometime around 530 ad . the copy found in the palimpsest was created from this original , also in constantinople , during the macedonian renaissance ( c . 950 ad ) , a time when mathematics in the capital was being revived by the former greek orthodox bishop of thessaloniki leo the geometer , a cousin of the patriarch . reviel netz , william noel and nigel wilson . the archimedes palimpsest , vol . 1 . catalogue and commentary , cambridge university press , 2011 . following the sack of constantinople by western crusaders in 1204 ad , the manuscript was taken to an isolated greek mar saba , possibly to protect it from occupying crusaders , who often equated greek script with heresy against their latin church and either burned or looted many such texts ( including at least two william of moerbeke ) . the complex manuscript was not appreciated at this remote monastery and was soon overwritten ( 1229 ad ) with a religious text . in 1899 , nine hundred years after it was written , the manuscript was still in the possession of the greek church , and back in istanbul , where it was catalogued by the greek scholar papadopoulos-kerameus , attracting the attention of johan heiberg . heiberg visited the church library and was allowed to make detailed photographs in 1906 . most of the original text was still visible , and heiberg published it in 1915 . in 1922 the manuscript went missing in the midst of the evacuation of the greek orthodox library in istanbul , during a tumultuous period following the first world war . concealed for over 70 years by a western businessman , forged pictures were painted on top of some text to increase resale value . unable to sell the book privately , in 1998 the businessman 's daughter risked a public auction in new york contested by the greek church ; the u.s . court ruled for the auction , and the manuscript was purchased by a wealthy american . the texts under the forged pictures , and previously unreadable texts , were revealed by analyzing images produced by ultraviolet , infrared , visible and raking light , and x-ray . all images and transcriptions are now open content on the web at the archimedes digital palimpsest ( see external links ) , under the creative commons license cc by .