an attack aircraft , strike aircraft , or attack bomber , is a tactical military aircraft that has a primary role of carrying out airstrikes with greater precision than bombers , and is prepared to encounter strong low-level air defenses while pressing the attack . mortensen 1987 , pp . 24–25 . this class of aircraft is designed mostly for close air support and naval air-to-surface missions , overlapping the tactical bomber mission . designs dedicated to non-naval roles are often known as ground-attack aircraft . gunston 2009 , p . 73 . fighter aircraft often carry out the attack role , although they would not be considered attack aircraft per se , although fighter-bomber conversions of those same aircraft would be considered part of the class . strike fighters , which have effectively replaced the fighter-bomber and light bomber concepts , also differ little from the broad concept of an attack aircraft . the dedicated attack aircraft as a separate class existed primarily during and after world war ii . the precise implementation varied from country to country , and was handled by a wide variety of designs . in the united states and britain attack aircraft were generally light bombers or medium bombers , sometimes carrying heavier forward-firing weapons like the north american b-25g mitchell and de havilland mosquito . in germany and the ussr , where they were known as schlachtflugzeug ( '' battle aircraft '' ) or sturmovik ( '' storm trooper '' ) respectively , this role was carried out by purpose-designed and heavily armored aircraft such as the henschel hs 129 and ilyushin il-2 . the germans and soviets also used light bombers in this role : cannon-armed versions of the junkers ju 87 stuka greatly outnumbered the hs 129 , while the petlyakov pe-2 was used for this role in spite of not being specifically designed for it . in the latter part of world war ii the fighter-bomber began to take over many attack roles , a transition that continued in the post-war era . jet-powered examples were relatively rare but not unknown , such as the blackburn buccaneer . the u.s . navy continued to introduce new aircraft in their a-series , but these were mostly similar to light and medium bombers . the need for a separate attack aircraft category was greatly diminished by the introduction of precision-guided munitions which allowed almost any aircraft to carry out this role while remaining safe at high altitude . attack helicopters also have overtaken many remaining roles that could only be carried out at lower altitudes . since the 1960s , only two dedicated attack aircraft designs have been widely introduced , the american fairchild republic a-10 thunderbolt ii and soviet/russian sukhoi su-25 frogfoot . one anomaly belonging to this class is the lockheed ac-130 , which features as its primary armament high-caliber artillery guns adapted for aircraft use including the 105 & nbsp ; mm m102 howitzer . a variety of light attack aircraft has also been introduced in the post-world war ii era , usually based on adapted trainers or other light fixed-wing aircraft . these have been used in counter-insurgency operations .