traci elizabeth lords ( born nora louise kuzma ; may 7 , 1968 ) is an american actress , former pornographic actress , singer , and model . lords got into the adult film industry by using a fake birth certificate to conceal the fact that she was two years under the legal age of 18 . lords starred in adult films and was one of the most sought-after actresses in the adult entertainment industry during her career . when the fbi acted on an anonymous tip that lords was a minor during her time in the industry , and that pornographers were distributing and selling these de facto illegal images and videotapes , the resulting fallout led to prosecution of those responsible for creating and distributing . in addition , all but the last of her adult films were banned as child pornography . after her departure from the industry only two days after turning the legal age of 18 , lords enrolled at the lee strasberg theater institute , where she studied method acting with the intention of becoming a mainstream actress . she made her mainstream screen debut at age 19 in a leading role in the 1988 remake of the 1957 roger corman science fiction film not of this earth . lords followed with the role of wanda woodward in john waters 's teen comedy , cry-baby ( 1990 ) . her other acting credits included the television series macgyver , married . with children , tales from the crypt , roseanne , melrose place , profiler , first wave , gilmore girls and will & grace . she also appeared in films such as skinner ( 1993 ) , virtuosity ( 1995 ) , blade ( 1998 ) , zack and miri make a porno ( 2008 ) and excision ( 2012 ) , which earned her a fangoria fangoria chainsaw awards as well as a fright meter award and a cineuphoria award . lords also pursued music in addition to her film career . after her song '' love never dies '' was featured on the soundtrack to the film pet sematary two ( 1992 ) , she was signed to radioactive records and subsequently released her debut studio album , 1000 fires ( 1995 ) to generally positive reviews . despite the poor sales of the album , the lead single '' control '' had moderate commercial success . it peaked at number two on the hot dance club songs chart and was included on the soundtrack to the film mortal kombat ( 1995 ) , which was eventually certified double platinum by the recording industry association of america ( riaa ) . in 2003 , lords published her autobiography , traci lords : underneath it all , which received positive reviews from critics and debuted at number 31 on the new york times best seller list . she is currently starring in the comedy series swedish dicks on pop .