an accurate value for the mass of the neutron could be determined from this process . chadwick and goldhaber tried this and found that it worked . they measured the kinetic energy of the proton produced as 1.05 mev , leaving the mass of the neutron as the unknown in the equation . chadwick and goldhaber calculated that it was either 1.0084 or 1.0090 atomic units , depending on the values used for the masses of the proton and deuteron . ( the modern accepted value for the mass of the neutron is . ) the mass of the neutron was too large to be a proton–electron pair . for his discovery of the neutron , chadwick was awarded the hughes medal by the royal society in 1932 , the nobel prize in physics in 1935 , the copley medal in 1950 and the franklin medal in 1951 . his discovery of the neutron made it possible to produce elements heavier than uranium in the laboratory by the capture of slow neutrons followed by beta decay . unlike the positively charged alpha particles , which are repelled by the electrical forces present in the nuclei of other atoms , neutrons do not need to overcome any coulomb barrier , and can therefore penetrate and enter the nuclei of even the heaviest elements such as uranium . this inspired enrico fermi to investigate the nuclear reactions brought about by collisions of nuclei with slow neutrons , work for which fermi would receive the nobel prize in 1938 . wolfgang pauli proposed another kind of particle on 4 december 1930 in order to explain the continuous spectrum of beta radiation that chadwick had reported in 1914 . since not all of the energy of beta radiation could be accounted for , the law of conservation of energy appeared to be violated , but pauli argued that this could be redressed if another , undiscovered , particle was involved . pauli also called this particle a neutron , but it was clearly not the same particle as chadwick 's neutron . fermi renamed it the neutrino , italian for '' little neutron '' . in 1934 , fermi proposed his fermi 's interaction which explained that the electrons emitted from the nucleus were created by the decay of a neutron into a proton , an electron , and a neutrino . the neutrino could account for the missing energy , but a particle with little mass and no electric charge was difficult to observe . rudolf peierls and hans bethe calculated that neutrinos could easily pass through the earth , so the chances of detecting them were slim . frederick reines and clyde cowan would neutrino experiment on 14 june 1956 by placing a detector within a large antineutrino flux from a nearby nuclear reactor .