thumb the rotation curve of a disc galaxy ( also called a velocity curve ) is a plot of the orbital speeds of visible stars or gas in that galaxy versus their radial distance from that galaxy 's centre . it is typically rendered graphically as a plot , and the data observed from each side of a spiral galaxy are generally asymmetric , so that data from each side are averaged to create the curve . a significant discrepancy exists between the experimental curves observed , and a curve derived by applying gravity theory to the matter observed in a galaxy . theories involving dark matter are the main postulated solutions to account for the variance . the rotational/orbital speeds of galaxies/stars do not follow the rules found in other orbital systems such as stars/planets and planets/moons that have most of their mass at the centre . stars revolve around their galaxy 's centre at equal or increasing speed over a large range of distances . in contrast , the orbital velocities of planets in planetary systems and moons orbiting planets decline with distance according to kepler ’ s third law . this reflects the mass distributions within those systems . the mass estimations for galaxies based on the light they emit are far too low to explain the velocity observations . the galaxy rotation problem is the discrepancy between observed galaxy rotation curves and the theoretical prediction , assuming a centrally dominated mass associated with the observed luminous material . when mass profiles of galaxies are calculated from the distribution of stars in spirals and mass-to-light ratios in the stellar disks , they do not match with the masses derived from the observed rotation curves and the law of gravity . a solution to this conundrum is to hypothesize the existence of dark matter and to assume its distribution from the galaxy 's center out to its halo . though dark matter is by far the most accepted explanation of the rotation problem , other proposals have been offered with varying degrees of success . of the possible alternatives , one of the most notable is modified newtonian dynamics ( mond ) , which involves modifying the laws of gravity . for an extensive discussion of the data and its fit to mond see