the cleveland spiders were an american professional baseball team based in cleveland , ohio . the team competed at the major league level from 1887 to 1899 , first for two seasons as a member of the now-defunct american association ( aa ) , followed by eleven seasons in the national league ( nl ) . early names for the team included the forest citys and blues . the name spiders itself emerged early in the team 's inaugural nl season of 1889 , owing to new black-and-gray uniforms and the skinny , long-limbed look of many players ( thereby evoking the spider arachnid ) . national league park served as the team 's home for its first four seasons until the opening of league park in 1891 . amid seven straight winning seasons under manager patsy tebeau , the team finished second in the national league three times & ndash ; in 1892 , 1895 , and 1896 . while the spiders never won the national league pennant , the club did win the 1895 temple cup , a two-team league championship playoff predating the world series . the spiders beat that year 's pennant winner , the baltimore orioles ( unrelated to the modern franchise ) , four games to one in a best-of-seven game series . six spiders players were later inducted into the national baseball hall of fame , including left fielder jesse burkett and pitcher cy young . in 1899 , owners frank and stanley robison purchased a second team & ndash ; the bankrupt st . louis nl franchise & ndash ; and sent all of the spiders ' top talent to that club , including future hall of famers young , burkett , and bobby wallace . the resulting spiders roster finished the 1899 season 20 & ndash ; 134 , a record which remains the worst for a single season in major league history . the spiders were subsequently one of four teams contracted by the national league that year . partly in response to the robison brothers ' actions & ndash ; which effectively ended the spiders franchise & ndash ; the practice of '' syndicate ownership '' was later banned . spiders outfielder louis sockalexis played for the team during its final three seasons and is often credited as the first native american to play professional baseball . the cleveland indians , major league successor to the spiders in cleveland , have long cited sockalexis as inspiration for their team name , though that claim is disputed .