lifespring , founded in 1974 , was a private , for-profit , human potential organization . lifespring stated they trained more than 400,000 people through its ten centers across the united states . lifespring encountered significant controversy ; various academic articles published in psychology journals in the 1970s and 1980s characterized lifespring 's training methods as '' deceptive and indirect techniques of persuasion and control '' , and featured allegations that lifespring was a cult that coerced members from leaving . after these allegations were highlighted in a 1987 article in the washington post and local television reporting in communities where lifespring had a significant presence , lifespring changed its name to the '' legacy center . '' the legacy center was also met with controversy , and when it was under investigation by the north carolina attorney general 's office for allegedly defrauding its members , it changed its name to the '' gratitude center . '' john hanley sr . , robert white , about robert white , living an extraordinary life , retrieved 10/20/13 randy revell , and charlene afremow founded lifespring in 1974 . large group awareness training program , the skeptic 's dictionary , retrieved 10/20/13 as of october 1987 , hanley owned 92.7 percent of the company . fisher , marc ( october 25 , 1987 ) . ' i cried enough to fill a glass ' . '' washington post magazine . prior to lifespring , hanley worked for the company holiday magic . he and the other founders also worked for mind dynamics with werner erhard , the founder of est , which became the basis for landmark education . lifespring concentrated on how people experience each other , whereas est dealt with changing the way people experience themselves . a critical analysis of the transformative model of mediation , terri l . kelly , department of conflict resolution , portland state university however , there were many similarities between the two . the former director for corporate affairs of lifespring , charles '' raz '' ingrasci , '' in the matter of the complaint of lifespring , inc . against kare-tv , channel 11 , '' minnesota news council , determination 83 also worked with erhard , promoting an est mission to the ussr and the hunger project . ingrasci is now president of the hoffman institute hoffman institute , board of directors , charles '' raz '' ingrasci , president & ceo which offers programs such as the hoffman quadrinity process which some regard as similar to lifespring .